





A TO Z LISTINGS

Much Higher (nutrient concentration)

Higher

Moderate

Lower

Much Lower

B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, Y, Z



A


AÇAI

ACHIOTE SEEDS (aka ANNATO SEEDS)

ADOBO SAUCE and/or SEASONING (see also CHILES, CHIPOTLE)

AFRICAN CUISINES (see also ETHIOPIAN CUISINE and MOROCCAN CUISINE)

AGAR or AGAR-AGAR (see also KANTEN)

AGAVE NECTAR

ALLIUMS (see GARLIC, LEEKS, ONIONS, etc.)

ALLSPICE

ALMONDS (and UNSWEETENED ALMOND BUTTER; see also MILK, ALMOND)

ALMONDS, MARCONA

AMARANTH (THE GRAIN) (see also GREENS, AMARANTH)

AMERICAN CUISINE (see also CAJUN/CREOLE CUISINE, SOUTHERN CUISINE, TEX-MEX CUISINE, etc.)

ANISE SEEDS

ANISE HYSSOP (aka LICORICE MINT)

ANISE, STAR (see STAR ANISE)

ANNATTO (see ACHIOTE)

APPLES (and APPLE CIDER, APPLE JUICE and/or APPLESAUCE)

APRICOTS (see also APRICOTS, DRIED)

APRICOTS, DRIED (see also APRICOTS)

ARAME (see also SEA VEGETABLES)

ARROWROOT (aka ARROWROOT FLOUR, POWDER, or STARCH)

ARTICHOKE HEARTS (see also ARTICHOKES)

ARTICHOKES (see also ARTICHOKE HEARTS)

ARTICHOKES, JERUSALEM (aka SUNCHOKES)

ARUGULA (aka ROCKET)

ASAFOETIDA POWDER (aka HING)

ASIAN CUISINES (see CHINESE CUISINE, JAPANESE CUISINE, THAI CUISINE, VIETNAMESE CUISINE, etc.)

ASPARAGUS

ASPARAGUS, WHITE

AUSTRIAN CUISINE

AUTUMN

AVOCADO

B


BAMBOO SHOOTS

BANANAS

BARLEY (e.g., HULLED)

BARLEY MALT

BARLEY, PEARL (or PEARLED)

BASIL

BASIL, THAI

BAY LEAF

BEANS—IN GENERAL (or MIXED)

BEANS, ADZUKI (aka ADUKI or AZUKI BEANS)

BEANS, ANASAZI

BEANS, BLACK (aka TURTLE BEANS)

BEANS, BORLOTTI (see BEANS, CRANBERRY)

BEANS, BROAD (see BEANS, FAVA)

BEANS, CANNELLINI (see also BEANS, WHITE)

BEANS, CRANBERRY (and BORLOTTI BEANS, a popular type of cranberry bean)

BEANS, FAVA (aka BROAD BEANS)

BEANS, FERMENTED BLACK (and SAUCE)

BEANS, FLAGEOLET

BEANS, FRENCH GREEN (aka HARICOTS VERTS)

BEANS, GARBANZO (see CHICKPEAS)

BEANS, GIGANTE (aka GIGANDE BEANS or GIANT BEANS)

BEANS, GREAT NORTHERN (see BEANS, WHITE)

BEANS, GREEN (aka SNAP BEANS, STRING BEANS or WAX BEANS; see also BEANS, FRENCH GREEN)

BEANS, KIDNEY (see also BEANS, RED)

BEANS, LIMA (aka BUTTER BEANS)

BEANS, LONG (aka YARD-LONG BEANS)

BEANS, MUNG

BEANS, NAVY (aka YANKEE BEANS)

BEANS, PINTO

BEANS, RED (see also similar BEANS, KIDNEY)

BEANS, SHELL (see BEANS, CRANBERRY; BEANS, FAVA; BEANS, LIMA)

BEANS, SOY (see EDAMAME and SOY BEANS)

BEANS, STRING (see BEANS, GREEN)

BEANS, WHITE (see also BEANS, CANNELLINI; BEANS, NAVY)

BEETS

BELL PEPPERS—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

BERRIES—IN GENERAL, or MIXED BERRIES (see also SPECIFIC BERRIES, e.g., BLACKBERRIES, BLUEBERRIES, RASPBERRIES, STRAWBERRIES)

BITTERNESS

BLACKBERRIES (see also BERRIES)Begin Reading

Table of Contents

Newsletters

Copyright Page




In accordance with the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, the scanning, uploading, and electronic sharing of any part of this book without the permission of the publisher constitute unlawful piracy and theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), prior written permission must be obtained by contacting the publisher at permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.





“And God said, See, I have given you every herb that yields seed which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree whose fruit yields seed; to you it shall be for food.”

—Genesis 1:29, New King James Bible

“It is my view that a vegetarian manner of living… would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind.”

—Albert Einstein, in a letter to Hermann Huth (December 27, 1930)

“The weight of evidence at this point in time… is so overwhelming.… Nothing else… can begin to compete with the evidence available for the whole food, plant-based diets in terms of promoting human health.”

—T. Colin Campbell, author of The China Study





For Andrew,

who—even after twenty-nine years—still continues to surprise me





INTRODUCTION



“Over half of Americans [52 percent] believe it is easier to figure out their income taxes than to figure out what they should and shouldn’t eat to be healthier.”

—THE 2012 FOOD & HEALTH SURVEY: CONSUMER ATTITUDES TOWARD FOOD SAFETY, NUTRITION & HEALTH, COMMISSIONED BY THE INTERNATIONAL FOOD INFORMATION COUNCIL FOUNDATION




“In all my interviews with nutrition experts, the benefits of a plant-based diet provided the only point of universal consensus.”

—MICHAEL POLLAN, IN DEFENSE OF FOOD (2008)




This book started with a problem: I didn’t know what to eat.

In two decades of writing about food, I’ve have had the pleasure and privilege of interviewing many of the world’s greatest chefs while studying their secrets for making food taste great. My work-related eating (including wine-tasting lunches and dinners) often took me to the dining rooms of DANIEL, Le Bernardin, and Per Se—or, during a year spent eating at chefs’ favorite restaurants from coast to coast, sampling In-N-Out burgers, pork-and-crab soup dumplings, and both Pat’s and Geno’s cheese steaks. My life included an endless pursuit of deliciousness, and I was always thrilled to discover what I’d learn from the next bite. But as more and more headlines trumpeted the relationship between nutrition and wellness, it dawned on me that for someone who ate for a living, I’d thought surprisingly little about what to put in my body to keep myself healthy when I wasn’t busy eating for professional reasons.

After I lost both my father and stepmother to cancer between 2006 and 2009, I couldn’t help thinking about my own half-century birthday looming on the horizon. It finally occurred to me, for the first time in my life, that I might want to start including healthfulness as a criterion for choosing what to eat.

After poring over dozens of books and websites on food and nutrition, I found myself confused by varying (and often contradictory) nutritional advice. If I—a graduate of Northwestern and Harvard and longtime culinary professional—was having a tough time figuring out what makes a healthful diet, what about everyone else? I was not surprised, then, to discover that in a 2012 poll, over half of Americans polled said they found it easier to do their taxes than to figure out what to eat to keep themselves healthy. Now that’s frustration.

The general public’s lack of nutritional knowledge is tragic, because it turns out that the leading cause of death in this country is nutritionally controllable diseases, such as cancer, heart disease, and diabetes. Diets that forego animal protein in favor of plant protein are associated with a lower risk of all three.

I eventually did find this common thread among what I learned to be the best-respected authorities: their advice to eat a plant-based diet, especially plentiful vegetables. The corollary was to avoid processed “junk” foods with empty calories (especially from fat and sugar) and to instead opt for whole foods as much as possible.

When I finally decided to experiment with virtually full-time vegetarianism in May 2012, I kept quiet about it—because having grown up in the heart of the Midwest, eating meat at least two and often three times a day, I had serious doubts that I could stick with a meatless diet for even a week or two.

My husband, Andrew—who had cooked professionally at some of the best restaurants in Boston and New York City, and who bravely joined me in my experiment in meatless eating—typically did our grocery shopping and most of the cooking. I provided “help” by giving him a list of what not to buy: Junk foods. Soft drinks. White flour, white sugar, white rice. Anything with hydrogenated vegetable oil. Trans fats. GMOs. Every news report seemed to add a new no-no to the list.

Over time, my “what-not-to-buy” list got so long that he grumbled, “Maybe you could make a list of what you’d like me to buy.”

A light bulb went off. I realized that avoiding certain foods—whether meats or white foods—was only one part of the picture. I decided to start a list of the healthiest ingredients that would provide us with the biggest nutritional bang for the calorie—“superfoods” that we could easily enjoy at home: Black beans. Blueberries. Broccoli. Kale. Lemons. Quinoa. Spinach. Then I started researching compatible flavors and flavor affinities for each, for ease in creating dishes. Then dish ideas themselves were added, often inspired by my research on the cookbooks, restaurants, and signature dishes of America’s best vegetarian and vegan chefs, dozens of whom I eventually interviewed. Although I started without any intention other than eating healthier at home, the project eventually evolved into this book and the lists you’ll find in Chapter 3.

Months later, we were both surprised to find that we didn’t miss meat at all. Instead, we were thrilled by all of the new flavor discoveries we were making about an exciting new repertoire of ingredients. We also noticed that when dining out, others were showing more interest in the meatless dishes we were being served than we had in those they were served. Andrew and I have been eating 99 percent vegetarian ever since.

When I finally started to mention this to others, I was asked time and time again by well-meaning friends and colleagues what I’ve since learned is the Number One question asked of vegetarians and vegans: “But how do you get your protein?”

My desire to make certain that the vegetarian diet I was embracing was indeed healthful—and to have well-informed, intelligent answers to such questions—led me to earn a certificate in plant-based nutrition from Cornell in conjunction with the T. Colin Campbell Foundation. The certificate program was created by the author of The China Study, the most groundbreaking, far-reaching nutritional study ever published. This is the education that helped inform my subsequent research for this book, which addresses three primary questions: what to eat (and in what quantities), how to make it healthful, and how to make it so delicious that its meatlessness is completely beside the point!





PROTEIN: IT’S WHAT’S FOR DINNER (AND LUNCH AND BREAKFAST)—EVEN WHEN YOU’RE EATING PLANTS


Here’s a typical conversation I’ve had after admitting to eating vegetarian, a version of which I first wrote as a class assignment for Cornell:

“Hey, Karen—did I hear you’re a vegetarian now? How are you getting enough protein if you’re not eating meat anymore? You don’t seem like the tofu and ‘wheat meat’ type!”

“Hi, Pat—actually, I’ve had some really delicious dishes made with tofu and seitan and even tempeh, but I don’t eat them very often. I probably get my protein from many of the same foods you do.”

“You mean you’re sneaking a cheeseburger here and there?”

“No, I mean I ran into you at the bagel place around the corner the other morning. A medium-sized bagel contains 10 grams of protein.”

“No kidding—I thought I was carbo-loading then!”

“Well, you got protein along with your carbs. I had my bagel that morning with a couple of tablespoons of peanut butter, which added another 8 grams of protein. And that night for dinner, Andrew made pasta primavera—with 8 grams of protein from the cup of pasta and another 9 grams of protein from the cup each of broccoli and spinach he added. It was delicious!”

“Guess I thought you had to eat meat to get protein. What other foods have it?”

“Lots of plant-based whole foods have protein, including legumes, such as beans, lentils, and peas—and chickpeas, which I know you like because I saw you eating that hummus wrap the other week. Plus whole grains, nuts, and seeds.… The list is long.”

“And you get as much protein from them as you would from a cheeseburger?”

“You can easily get enough protein from a balanced plant-based diet—but with a lot less fat. And because of the health risks—including cancer and heart disease—you definitely don’t want to be eating too much protein.”

“Wow—I didn’t know.… I thought protein was good for you.”

“It is—it’s essential. But many people are unaware that it can actually be very risky to eat too much animal protein—which might just explain why there are so many sick people in the U.S., despite the fact that we spend more on healthcare than any other country.”





MAKING IT HEALTHFUL


“Let food be thy medicine.”

—HIPPOCRATES



Hippocrates was right. Each of us can play a role in solving our nation’s health crisis by taking the responsibility for choosing and administering our own “medicine,” an average of three times a day. As many doctors receive little or no training in nutrition, it’s up to each of us to learn the basics so we can eat to keep ourselves in good health and our immune systems strong. Happily, more Americans are finally understanding the health risks posed by animal protein and are reducing or eliminating it from their diets. Per capita meat consumption in the U.S. has fallen for the last five years and is forecasted to keep falling.

However, even when following a vegetarian diet, what you eat is just as important as what you don’t eat. After all, a soy burger on a white bun with corn chips and a soft drink may not contain meat, but few would argue that it’s a healthful meal.

On a visit several years ago to one of the top-rated vegetarian restaurants in the New York City Zagat Survey, I was struck by how many dishes were deep-fried and how “heavy” I felt afterward. The lesson hit home that it’s also important to favor dishes made via water-based cooking techniques (e.g., boiling, poaching, steaming) over fat-based cooking techniques (e.g., deep-fat frying, sautéing).

In addition, you’ll want to make sure your diet emphasizes foods that are the most nutritionally dense, delivering the most nutrients for the fewest calories. Dr. Joel Fuhrman, the bestselling author of Eat to Live, has developed a useful system called ANDI (Aggregate Nutrient Density Index), which Whole Foods shoppers might already be familiar with, as it’s used throughout the stores. Various foods are rated for nutrient content on a scale of 0–1000, so you can minimize foods at the lower end of the scale (e.g., cola and corn chips, which score a 1 and a 7, respectively) and seek out those at the higher end of the scale (e.g., greens such as collard, kale, and watercress, all of which score a perfect 1000). Other systems such as Dr. David Katz’s NuVal (featured at grocers like Kroger and Lowes) similarly score foods based on their nutrition. In Chapter 3, you’ll find many foods color-coded to help you find those that are more nutritionally dense (i.e., those with dark green triangles) and exercise judgment when it comes to others (i.e., those red triangles). As a rule of thumb,


Most green vegetables (and many herbs and spices)

Most nongreen vegetables, fresh fruits, and legumes

Most dried or sweeter fruits, grains, nuts, and seeds

Most dairy products (e.g., cheese, full-fat milk and yogurt)

Most oils and sweeteners

But opting for kale 100 percent of the time to fulfill your vegetable quotient doesn’t make for a healthful diet, either, despite its status as a nutritional powerhouse. You need vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients that can come only from eating a wide variety of vegetables. My own strategy is to eat “in a different country” most days of the week, which presents me with a broad range of vegetables over the course of a week or two. For example:


Chinese: bok choy, broccoli, eggplant, long beans, mushrooms, snow peas

Ethiopian: beets, collard greens, green beans, lentils, onions

French: carrots, celery root, eggplant, French lentils, leeks, onions

Greek: chickpeas, eggplant, gigante beans, romaine lettuce, spinach

Indian: cauliflower, chickpeas, eggplant, jackfruit, lentils, spinach

Italian: arugula, broccoli rabe, tomatoes, white beans, zucchini

Japanese: edamame, mushrooms, sea vegetables (e.g., kelp, wakame), spinach

Mexican: avocados, beans, chayote, chiles, corn, tomatillos, tomatoes

Moroccan: cabbage, carrots, chickpeas, sweet potatoes, turnips, zucchini

Spanish: green or white asparagus, piquillo peppers, potatoes

Thai: bamboo shoots, bell peppers, eggplant, green beans, onions

Vietnamese: cabbage, cucumbers, lettuce, mushrooms, taro, watercress

Variety is just as important when it comes to the rest of your diet—namely, fruits, grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds—which helps to ensure you’re taking in the variety of nutrients your body needs. Dr. Fuhrman even came up with the useful acronym “G-BOMBS” as a reminder of the most nutritionally dense foods he believes should be a part of a healthful daily diet: greens, beans, onions, mushrooms, berries, and seeds, which he has found to be “extremely effective at preventing chronic disease and promoting health and longevity.”

I love rules of thumb because they’re straightforward and useful. One of the easiest to remember is Michael Pollan’s seven-word mantra: “Eat food. Not too much. Mostly plants.” By advising us to “eat food,” Pollan refers to whole foods—meaning we should avoid processed foods. “Mostly plants” means we should make sure that the majority of our diet consists of vegetables, fruits, whole grains and whole-grain products, legumes, nuts, and seeds. And “not too much” warns against overconsuming food in such quantities that we become overweight or obese and put ourselves at greater risk of heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes.

ChooseMyPlate.gov offers “Tips for Vegetarians,” suggesting that they may need to give special attention to their intake of “protein, iron, calcium, zinc, and vitamin B12.” I address the (non-)issue of getting sufficient nutrients such as protein and calcium later in this chapter, but it’s worth covering the others here briefly. Vegetarians who eat eggs and/or dairy shouldn’t have a problem getting enough vitamin B12. Vegans sometimes sprinkle cheesy-tasting nutritional yeast (a great source of B12) on their popcorn and tofu scrambles or take B12 supplements.

However, both iron (in beans, black-eyed peas, blackstrap molasses, broccoli, chard, chickpeas, collard greens, lentils, spinach, tempeh, tofu) and zinc (in almonds, beans, cashews, chickpeas, green peas, oatmeal, pumpkin seeds, wheat germ) are readily available via plant-based sources. Since I started to eat vegetarian, my blood tests haven’t indicated any nutritional deficiencies; in addition, my hair and skin (which now feel amazingly moisturized from the inside out) both have a new glow, and perhaps most tellingly, I feel better than ever.

A nutrient-rich, whole-food plant-based diet is the answer to so many health concerns—from protecting our bones, brains, eyes, hearts, and kidneys, to preventing or sometimes even reversing autoimmune diseases, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and more. And if you’re seeking any additional reasons to consider a vegetarian or even vegan diet, you’re likely to find them in Chapter 1.





WHAT TO EAT (AND HOW MUCH)


“Vegetarian diets can meet all the recommendations for nutrients. The key is to consume a variety of foods and the right amount of foods to meet your calorie needs.”

—CHOOSEMYPLATE.GOV, “TIPS FOR VEGETARIANS”




“Go with plants. Eating a plant-based diet is healthiest. Make your plate vegetables and fruits (potatoes and French fries don’t count as vegetables).… Get most or all of your protein from beans, nuts and seeds, or tofu.”

—THE NUTRITION SOURCE, HARVARD SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH (HSPH.HARVARD.EDU)



Food is composed of one or more of three macronutrients: protein, carbohydrates, and fat. All three are essential to a healthful diet, so you’ll want to choose foods that provide you with sufficient quantities of each—but not too much of any, especially protein and fat, which correlate with increased rates of disease when they are overconsumed. But what is the right proportion? Based on all I’ve learned, I’ll give a short answer and a long answer.



The Short Answer: A healthful meatless diet consists primarily of roughly equal proportions of vegetables, fruits, legumes, and whole grains (accented by nuts and seeds). If you picture yourself filling your plate with some of each at every meal, making sure to eat a wide variety of whole, unprocessed foods from every category over the course of every week (to ensure that you’re getting a variety of vitamins, minerals, and other nutrients), and not overeating (i.e., not consuming too many calories, particularly from protein or fat), generally speaking, you don’t need to worry about counting calories, grams of protein, or anything else.


The Long Answer: Opinions differ on exactly what proportions of total calories you should get from each macronutrient. For benchmarks, I’ll share what the U.S. government recommends via its 2010 ChooseMyPlate.gov program—which many have argued overemphasizes meat and dairy as a result of those industries’ enormous economic and political clout—and contrast that with recommendations from other respected sources such as The China Study. Each of us needs to decide for ourselves what to eat, and those decisions are, ideally, well informed and appropriate to our personal circumstances (e.g., younger and healthy, versus older and trying to reverse heart disease). For what it’s worth, I’ll also share what I personally choose to eat, based on what I’ve learned.





PROTEIN


The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that 10 to 35 percent of total daily calories come from protein.

However, in The China Study, T. Colin Campbell recommends that less than 10 percent of total daily calories come from healthful protein (sufficient to meet the body’s need for 5 to 6 percent dietary protein to replace that which the body regularly excretes, yet insufficient to trigger the onset of disease), which translates into just 50 to 60 grams of protein per day. The average American typically consumes 70 to 100 grams per day, primarily from animal-based sources (e.g., meats, poultry, seafood), a level of overconsumption that correlates with a higher risk of diseases such as heart disease and certain cancers. Because 50 to 60 grams of protein a day can easily be provided by a plant-based diet, The China Study recommends avoiding meat, poultry, eggs, and dairy.


“Dietary protein within the range of 10–20 percent is associated with a broad array of health problems [e.g., higher blood cholesterol levels, higher risks of atherosclerosis, cancer, osteoporosis, Alzheimer’s disease, and kidney stones], especially when most of the protein is from animal sources.”

—T. COLIN CAMPBELL, THE CHINA STUDY





PROTEIN FOODS


ChooseMyPlate.gov recommends 5 to 6½ ounces or “ounce equivalents” of protein per day for adults.


What counts? A wide variety of vegetarian foods provide protein.


Sample choices: beans (e.g., black, kidney, navy, pinto, white), eggs (e.g., frittatas, omelets), falafel, legumes (e.g., black-eyed peas, chickpeas, lentils, split peas), nuts and nut butters (e.g., almonds, cashews, hazelnuts, peanuts, pecans, pistachios, walnuts), seeds (e.g., chia, hemp, pumpkin, sesame, sunflower), seitan, soups (e.g., bean, lentil, split pea), soybeans and soy products, tempeh, texturized vegetable protein (TVP), tofu, vegetarian chili made with beans, some veggie burgers (e.g., those made with beans or other legumes or soy), not to mention many other foods that contain protein (e.g., grains, such as kamut and quinoa; or vegetables such as broccoli, cauliflower, kale, spinach, and watercress, as more than 40 percent of their calories are from protein).

One “ounce equivalent” is about ¼ cup cooked beans, 1 egg, 1 tablespoon of peanut butter, or ½ ounce of nuts or seeds. Or, if you’d rather count grams of protein to make sure you’re not getting too much, here are some examples of the number of grams of protein in common servings:

1 large egg = 6 grams

½ cup black beans = 7.5 grams

½ cup black-eyed peas = 6.5 grams

½ cup chickpeas = 7.5 grams

½ cup lentils = 9 grams

1 ounce almonds = 6 grams

1 ounce peanut butter = 7 grams

1 ounce tempeh = 5 grams

¼ cup firm (raw) tofu = 10 grams

1 Burger King veggie burger = 14 grams

1 Shake Shack ’Shroom (vegetarian) burger = 18 grams



Don’t forget that vegetarian protein sources also include vegetables and grains! Here are a few examples of other foods with protein content:

1 medium artichoke = 3 grams

1 cup asparagus = 4 grams

1 cup pureed avocado = 5 grams

½ large bagel = 7 grams

1 cup broccoli = 4 grams

1 cup Brussels sprouts = 4 grams

1 medium potato = 5 grams

½ cup quinoa = 4 grams

1 cup spinach = 5 grams

½ cup sun-dried tomatoes = 4 grams



By the way, contrary to popular belief, the idea that you have to combine certain proteins (e.g., beans and rice) at the same meal has been disproven. Given reports of the myth’s persistence as of this writing, this finding seems to bear repeating.


“Protein is found in most plant foods as well as animal foods. Your body will make its own complete protein if a variety of foods and enough calories are eaten during the day.”

—ACADEMY OF NUTRITION AND DIETETICS (EATRIGHT.ORG)



T. Colin Campbell, author of The China Study, recommends that you avoid meat, poultry, dairy, and eggs; eat all you want (while getting lots of variety) of any whole, unrefined plant-based foods (e.g., legumes, nuts, etc.).


Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn, author of the bestselling book Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease, recommends “not eating anything with a mother or a face (no meat, poultry, or fish).”


What I do: I aim to consume less than 10 percent of my total calories from protein—and to get the protein from plants. A few tips: I typically eat one half-cup to one cup of legumes daily. For breakfast, I sometimes spread peanut butter on apple slices or whole-grain toast or make a tofu scramble. I love adding beans or chickpeas to soups and even green or grain salads, and low-fat hummus is one food you’ll always find in our refrigerator. For Chinese or Thai meals, I add cubes of tofu to brown rice dishes and curries.





Know Your Nutrition


If you’d like to analyze the nutritional content of various foods, visit the USDA’s National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference at ndb.nal.usda.gov or the more user-friendly site based on its data at nutritiondata.self.com.

To analyze the nutritional content of a recipe or your diet, visit a website such as caloriecount.about.com, which also provides “Nutrition Grades” for specific foods.





CARBOHYDRATES


The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that 45 to 65 percent of total daily calories come from carbohydrates.


Dr. Campbell recommends that at least 80 percent of total daily calories come from healthful carbohydrates.


The primary sources of carbohydrates are vegetables, fruits, grains/cereals, and legumes. Legumes (primarily peas and beans) are also a significant source of protein, so vegetarians can count them as either carbohydrates (vegetables) or protein.


“The USDA Food Patterns classify beans and peas as a subgroup of the Vegetable Group. The USDA Food Patterns also indicate that beans and peas may be counted as part of the Protein Foods Group. Individuals can count beans and peas as either a vegetable or a protein food. Green peas, green lima beans, and green (string) beans are not considered to be part of the beans and peas subgroup. Green peas and green lima beans are similar to other starchy vegetables and are grouped with them. Green beans are grouped with other vegetables such as onions, lettuce, celery, and cabbage because their nutrient content is similar to those foods.”

—CHOOSEMYPLATE.GOV





VEGETABLES


ChooseMyPlate.gov recommends 2 to 3 cups daily for adults.


What counts? Whole, cut, or mashed vegetables (fresh, frozen, dehydrated, or canned, served either raw or cooked), or 100 percent vegetable juice.


Sample choices: A variety from among the five sub-groups of vegetables, each of which provides a different mix of nutrients.

Dark green: beet greens, bok choy, broccoli, chard, collard greens, dark green lettuce, endive, escarole, kale, mustard greens, romaine, spinach, turnip greens, watercress

Red and orange: acorn squash, butternut squash, carrots, Hubbard squash, pumpkin, red bell peppers, sweet potatoes, tomatoes and tomato juice

Starchy: black-eyed peas, corn, green peas, green plantains, Jerusalem artichokes, lima beans, parsnips, plantains, potatoes, pumpkin, sweet potatoes, taro, water chestnuts, winter squash, yams (Note that starchy vegetables, which are calorically dense, should be eaten in moderation, especially by those seeking to lose weight.)

Peas and beans: black beans, black-eyed peas, chickpeas, kidney beans, lentils, navy beans, pinto beans, soybeans, split peas, white beans (These also contain significant amounts of protein.)

Other: artichokes, asparagus, avocados, beets, Brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, cucumbers, eggplant, green beans, green bell peppers, iceberg lettuce, mushrooms, okra, onions, sea vegetables, sprouts (e.g., bean), summer squash, turnips, zucchini



Dr. Campbell recommends that you eat all you want, while getting lots of variety, of any whole, unrefined plant-based food such as vegetables.


What I do: I eat as many vegetables as possible every day—about half raw (e.g., in salads, or in juices and smoothies) and half cooked. I shoot for two or three green leafy vegetables, and one or two cruciferous vegetables (e.g., broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower) among them. Tips: I eat a salad with lots of raw veggies at lunch and/or dinner. I also try to eat one or two vegetables at every meal (e.g., a banana-and-kale smoothie, a veggie omelet, or veggie-tofu scramble at breakfast; a vegetable-based soup at lunch or dinner, as well as vegetables in a main course, such as a burrito, farrotto/risotto, noodle or rice bowl, pasta, pizza, stir-fry, etc.). Knowing the importance of having two or three green leafy vegetables (e.g., collard greens, kale, spinach) every day, I’ve discovered that a glass of green juice gives me a great natural pick-me-up—better than caffeine!—so I’ve traded in my former 4:00 p.m. coffee break for an afternoon green juice break.





FRUITS


ChooseMyPlate.gov recommends 1½ to 2 cups daily for adults.


What counts? Whole, cut, or pureed fruit, or 100 percent fruit juice (e.g., apple, grape, grapefruit, orange). Because of its concentration of nutrients and fiber, a half-cup of dried fruit, such as prunes or raisins, counts as a one-cup serving.


Sample choices: apples and applesauce, apricots, bananas, berries (e.g., blackberries, blueberries, raspberries, strawberries), cherries, citrus fruits (e.g., grapefruits, lemons, limes, oranges), grapes, kiwis, mangoes, melons (e.g., cantaloupes, honeydews, watermelons), nectarines, peaches, pears, papayas, pineapples, plums, tangerines


Dr. Campbell recommends eating all you want, while getting lots of variety, of any whole, unrefined plant-based food such as fruits.


What I do: I aim for an average of three servings of raw, fresh fruit daily. Tips: I have fruit on top of my morning oatmeal, as part of a fruit or green salad, or in a smoothie. I love freezing bananas and putting them through a Champion juicer for a softserve-like dessert.





GRAINS / CEREALS


ChooseMyPlate.gov recommends 5–8 ounces or “ounce equivalents” daily for adults, with more than 50 percent coming from whole grains.


What counts? Whole-grain foods include breads, cereals such as granola or muesli, crackers, pastas, tortillas, etc., made from whole grains or whole “pseudograins” (which are not technically grains but are commonly grouped with them), e.g., amaranth, barley, brown rice, buckwheat, bulgur, corn and whole-grain cornmeal, farro, kamut, kasha, millet, oats (including rolled oats and oatmeal), popcorn, quinoa, rice, rye berries, sorghum, spelt, teff, triticale, wheat berries, wild rice, or another cereal grain.


Sample choices: One “ounce equivalent” is about ¼ large bagel, 1 slice of bread, ½ English muffin, ½ cup cooked grain (e.g., bulgur, oats), pasta, or rice; 2 three-inch pancakes, 3 cups of popcorn, 1 cup of prepared cereal, or 1 six-inch tortilla.


Dr. Campbell recommends eating all you want, while getting lots of variety, of any whole, unrefined plant-based foods such as whole grains (e.g., in breads, pastas, etc.).


What I do: I limit my grains to three to five servings daily. Tips: I sometimes make myself oatmeal or another whole grain as a hot breakfast cereal and have a sandwich on a slice or two of whole-grain bread or pita for lunch, while dinner sometimes revolves around brown rice or another whole grain (e.g., farro, wheat berries) served risotto-style, whole-grain pasta or pizza dough, or whole-grain tortillas. Most of the time, I try to avoid refined grains (i.e., white rice or anything made from white flour, including white bread) altogether, and to opt for whole-grain versions of rice noodles, cornbread, corn tortillas, and couscous.





FAT


The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that 20 to 35 percent of total daily calories come from fat.


Dr. Campbell recommends that less than 10 percent of total daily calories come from fat.





OILS / FATS


ChooseMyPlate.gov suggests an allowance of 5 to 7 teaspoons of oils daily for adults. One teaspoon of any oil or fat contains 40 calories. ChooseMyPlate.gov indicates that no added fats may be necessary, given that “some Americans consume enough oil in the foods they eat, such as nuts, [fish,] cooking oil, and salad dressings.” The Standard American Diet (SAD) is close to 40 percent fat, so for many people, achieving a healthier target requires a dramatic lifestyle change—such as not making or ordering fried dishes, omitting the oil from stir-fries, or not slathering butter or oil on breads.


What counts? oils and oily foods (Note that solid fats—fats that are solid at room temperature, such as butter, margarine, and milk fat, along with coconut oil and palm oil—should be minimized or avoided in vegetarian diets aiming to lower cholesterol levels.)


Sample choices: oils (e.g., canola; corn; hazelnut; olive and other plant-based, organic, expeller-pressed, high-oleic oils; safflower; sesame; soybean; sunflower; walnut) and oily foods such as avocados, mayonnaise, nuts (e.g., almonds, cashews, hazelnuts, peanuts, walnuts) and nut butters, olives, seeds (e.g., flax, hemp, pumpkin, sesame, sunflower), some salad dressings


Dr. Campbell recommends minimizing added vegetable oils (e.g., corn oil, olive oil, peanut oil).


Dr. Esselstyn famously recommends “NO OIL!” at all. Zero. No avocados or nuts, either.


What I do: I avoid adding much, if any, oil to my diet (e.g., by cooking in vegetable stock instead of oil). I do sometimes add a little olive oil to certain salad dressings, but in less than the standard 1:3 ratio. Tips: Eat something every day for healthful omega-3 fats (e.g., canola oil, flaxseeds in smoothies, walnuts in granola or oatmeal). And I do love avocados as guacamole, added to salads, or whipped into salad dressings.





DAIRY


(Note: Whole milk is 50 percent fat, 30 percent carbs, and 20 percent protein, while cheese is 75 percent fat and 25 percent protein—which is why this food group is listed here. Note, however, that dairy is not listed as a fat at ChooseMyPlate.gov.)


ChooseMyPlate.gov recommends 3 cups or “cup equivalents” daily for adults, especially fat-free or low-fat options.


What counts? cheese, cream and ice cream, milk and ice milk, (calcium-fortified) soy milk, yogurt and frozen yogurt. (You’ll also want to count foods like cream-based soups, milk-based coffee drinks, and yogurt-based dips or smoothies.)


Sample choices: One “cup equivalent” is about 2 cups cottage cheese, 1½ ounces hard cheese, 1½ cups ice cream, 1 cup milk or calcium-fortified soy milk, 1 cup milk-based pudding, ½ cup ricotta cheese, ⅓ cup shredded cheese, or 1 cup yogurt.


Dr. Campbell recommends avoiding dairy.


Dr. Esselstyn recommends avoiding dairy.


What I do: I am lactose intolerant. It’s a trait I happen to share with 75 percent of the world’s population, according to the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, which also points out that the lot of us are starting to be referred to as “normal” and those who are able to digest lactose as “lactose persistent.” I avoid milk, cream, and other dairy—and gag at the thought of ever trying to consume ChooseMyPlate’s recommended 3 cups a day! I find some cheeses and yogurts somewhat easier to digest, but—given some indication of a correlation between high levels of full-fat dairy consumption and certain diseases such as breast cancer—I eat them only very rarely, such as to garnish pasta (e.g., Parmesan), Greek food (e.g., tzatziki), or Indian food (e.g., raita). Tips: I gave up my former daily cappuccino habit more than a decade ago, and I’ve happily switched to almond milk with my morning oatmeal or granola and love the way it enhances the flavor of both.

ChooseMyPlate.gov emphasizes that foods in the dairy group “provide nutrients that are vital for health and maintenance of your body,” including protein (see above), calcium, potassium, and vitamin D. However, those of us who choose to largely or entirely avoid dairy can healthfully turn to other options for these nutrients:

Calcium: beans (e.g., black, kidney, navy, pinto, white), black-eyed peas, blackstrap molasses, bok choy, broccoli, chickpeas, dark leafy greens (e.g., collard, mustard, turnip), fortified soy milk, kale, nuts and nut butters (e.g., almonds), sesame seeds and sesame paste, spinach, tempeh, tofu that is processed with calcium sulfate

Potassium: avocados, beans (e.g., kidney, lima, pinto), chard, fruits (especially bananas) and fruit juices, lentils, papayas, potatoes, spinach

Vitamin D: egg yolks, mushrooms (e.g., portobellos, shiitakes), or vitamin D–fortified foods such as cereals, juices, and milks (both dairy and nondairy)—or simply spend 10 to 15 minutes in the sunshine every day or two, and your body will make its own vitamin D. If it’s cloudy or you can’t be outdoors enough, consider taking a supplement.



By the way, on the question of what to drink as a beverage instead of milk, I’ll share that I typically drink hot tea at breakfast, water or iced tea at lunch (I’m particularly fond of caffeine-free SPORTea, which I was first introduced to at the Lodge at Woodloch in Pennsylvania), and one glass of wine at dinner (per the 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans, which allow two glasses of wine for men).





MAKING IT DELICIOUS


“I believe the future is vegetables and fruits. They are so much sexier than a piece of chicken.… You get a piece of meat and you put it in your mouth, you chew, the first five seconds, all the juices flow around your mouth, they’re gone, and then you are twenty more seconds chewing something that is tasteless at this point. Something like this doesn’t happen with a pineapple, an asparagus, or a green pea.”

—CHEF JOSÉ ANDRÉS, IN AN INTERVIEW WITH ANDERSON COOPER ON 60 MINUTES (APRIL 27, 2010)



Once you’ve committed to enjoying a whole foods, plant-based diet, this is where the real fun begins.

In Chapter 2, you’ll find insights from some of the country’s leading chefs on how to do so deliciously. In Chapter 3, you’ll find a comprehensive A-to-Z list of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, and other ingredients, along with the herbs, spices, and other seasonings that best enhance their flavor—not to mention the techniques that best showcase their texture and flavor. You’ll also find tips from leading chefs on how they work with these ingredients and how the ingredients are combined into signature dishes.

My pursuit of deliciousness never went away—it’s merely changed direction over the past few years. If I hadn’t discovered eating vegetarian to be so delicious, I’d never have lasted beyond that first meatless week. But as I’ve learned through the vegetarian and even vegan anniversary and birthday meals we’ve enjoyed at Blue Hill, DANIEL, Eleven Madison Park, the Inn at Little Washington, Mélisse, Per Se, Picholine, Zaytinya, and elsewhere—not to mention at America’s diverse range of impressive vegetarian and vegan restaurants, which have been a revelation to experience, as well as ethnic and other vegetable-centric restaurants—eating this way offers the thrill of discovery of new avenues of flavor. In the pages that follow, I’m happy to share with you all I’ve had the pleasure of learning over the past several years, and I am confident you’ll be as happy as I’ve been to find that this way of eating can be even more satisfying and delicious than you ever dreamed possible. Best of all, armed with this book, you’ll be on the front line of creating new dishes and a whole new way of eating that’s as healthful for others and for the planet as it is for you.





FOR THE LOVE OF PLANTS:

VEGETARIANISM THROUGH THE AGES



“The gods created certain kinds of beings to replenish our bodies… the trees and the plants and the seeds.”

—PLATO




“I do feel that spiritual progress does demand at some stage that we should cease to kill our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of our bodily wants.”

—MOHANDAS GANDHI




“The average person doesn’t have a clue that the meat they’re eating is causing all this havoc. They don’t understand about the effects on the environment or on human cells. The suffering of the animals they might try to turn away from. So how to make them listen and understand is difficult, but it’s happening.”

—JANE GOODALL



For the first time in history, interest in vegetarianism is on its way to becoming mainstream. After being embraced by countless people over millennia, it is still not typical—with just 5 percent of American adults self-identifying as vegetarian (abstaining from all meat), and another 2 percent as vegan (abstaining from all meat, eggs, and dairy), according to a July 2012 Gallup poll—although these numbers are growing. However, when they are added to the more than 47 percent of adult Americans who acknowledge a wish to decrease their meat consumption (according to a 2011 USA Today report), one could argue that the desire to eat less or even no meat is finally becoming the norm. Four consecutive years of decline in U.S. meat consumption, from 2006 to 2010—the first on record—and USDA projections of further declines offer additional evidence that a profound shift is under way.

Eating vegetarian, and even vegan, is easier than ever before. The proliferation of dedicated vegetarian restaurants—from upscale Vedge in Philadelphia, which GQ named one of the best new restaurants of 2012, to fast-casual chains like Native Foods and Veggie Grill—not to mention vegetarian menu options everywhere from Chipotle and Subway to DANIEL and the French Laundry to countless independent Asian, Indian, Mediterranean, and other ethnic restaurants, makes vegetarian dining a no-brainer. At the same time, the rapid growth in farmers’ markets, CSAs, and vegetarian cookbooks and media have been a boon to home cooks. Even veganism is less challenging, as evidenced by more widespread availability of nondairy milks (which saw U.S. sales topping $1.4 billion in 2013), nondairy butters (e.g., Earth Balance) and nondairy cheeses (e.g., Daiya), as well as eggless mayonnaises (e.g., Vegenaise).

No longer exclusively the domain of countercultural “hippies,” vegetarianism and veganism are, well, hip, thanks to their endorsement by some of the most influential people of this era. Television personalities such as Ellen DeGeneres and Oprah Winfrey and popular entertainers including Kristen Bell, Russell Brand, Alan Cumming, Woody Harrelson, Anne Hathaway, Chrissie Hynde, Joan Jett, Jared Leto, Adam Levine, Jennifer Lopez, Tobey Maguire, Lea Michele, Morrissey, Natalie Portman, Prince, Alicia Silverstone, Carrie Underwood, and Forest Whitaker have thrust meatless diets into the media spotlight and helped to keep them there. Even BusinessWeek has profiled industry leaders who eschew meat, including Twitter cofounder Biz Stone and hotelier Steve Wynn, and perhaps most notably former President Bill Clinton, who lost 24 pounds after 2004 quadruple bypass surgery and 2010 stent surgery by switching to a vegan diet.

Vegetarianism has been around for as long as human beings themselves, and compelling arguments for abstaining from meat are numerous and timeless. A glance through history shows the various cultural, economic, environmental, ethical, global, medical, nutritional, patriotic, practical, religious, and other factors that have given rise to vegetarianism. On the heels of the teachings of world religions and Greek and Roman philosophers, an impressive number of history’s greatest geniuses—including da Vinci, Einstein, and Gandhi—lived some or all of their adult lives as vegetarians.

The advent of nutritional science in the twentieth century has established the relationship between diet and health, as well as demonstrated a correlation between consuming too much animal protein and many chronic diseases, including heart disease, certain cancers, and obesity. Groundbreaking studies republished in bestselling books like The China Study, reinforced by other efforts such as the popular “Meatless Monday” campaign, have helped make common knowledge out of this information. Former Beatle Sir Paul McCartney famously quipped, “If slaughterhouses had glass walls, everyone would be vegetarian.” Indeed, the Internet and YouTube have put just a click away horrifying video images of some of what goes on in the factory farms that supply 99 percent of the meat, eggs, and dairy products consumed in the United States, providing virtual “glass walls” that have been fueling the growing animal welfare movement. And facts, figures, and photos of what eating animals is doing to our most precious natural resources—our air, land, and water—make the reality too hard to ignore, leading even billionaire Bill Gates, who’s investing in companies developing vegan meat and egg replacements, to advocate a move toward vegetarianism as a way to save the planet and avoid the looming global food shortage crisis.

With such powerful champions and arguments, why isn’t everyone vegetarian yet? There are also powerful cultural, economic, and political forces underlying American society and its meat- and dairy-centric status quo. Turn on the TV, and you’ll find a seemingly endless stream of ads promoting meaty, cheesy fast food, followed by another endless stream of ads for pharmaceuticals that promise relief from the ailments often correlated with overconsuming such products.

Government policy is arguably more supportive of big business that contributes mightily to the U.S. economy than of the health of its individual citizens (especially our children, whose obesity-driven diabetes epidemic is leading to tragic predictions of shorter lifespans). Commodity products like corn and soybeans that are fed to livestock are subsidized with taxpayer dollars, as are the meat and dairy industries themselves, which in 2011 benefited directly or indirectly from 63 percent of government agricultural subsidies, while fruit and vegetable producers received less than 1 percent. Over the past fifty years, those representing the interests of the meat and dairy industries have sometimes been the ones setting our country’s nutritional policy guidelines (as a 2000 court ruling determined), despite the obvious conflicts of interest.

But it’s becoming clearer every day that moving toward vegetarianism is better for your health, better for the health of other living beings, and better for the planet as a whole. While you don’t have to be a full-time vegetarian to reap the benefits, I hope that you’ll discover—as I have—that eating vegetarian is so delicious and makes you feel so much better, lighter, and more energetic, that you’ll opt to maximize these benefits by eliminating as much meat as you choose. And I do believe it’s important to emphasize that what you choose to eat is a personal decision—one best made by fully understanding how eating animals affects your personal health and well-being, that of your family and others, and that of our planet.


“If anyone wants to save the planet, all they have to do is stop eating meat.”

—SIR PAUL MCCARTNEY



Choosing to not eat meat, or even to eat less of it, is a simple yet powerful way to be a part of the solution to some of the most pressing problems of today and tomorrow. Think of vegetarianism as presenting a spectrum of choices:



Fully 93 percent of the population does not self-identify as wholly vegetarian or vegan. Bestselling author Dr. John McDougall counts himself among that majority, even though he has espoused the health benefits of a low-fat vegan diet for decades while eating a 99+ percent meatless diet himself. He explains, “I do not want to be thought of as a vegetarian because so many people who call themselves vegetarians are unhealthy,” citing a soy burger, French fries, and Coca-Cola as a vegetarian meal. I also count myself among that 93 percent, even though I have eaten a 99+ percent meatless diet since May 2012. I believe labels can be divisive, emphasizing differences rather than bringing people together—and bringing people together can be one of food’s greatest benefits and pleasures.

Clearly, nonvegetarians fall along a broad spectrum representing a wide range of diets. Omnivores (people who eat everything, both animals and plants) can choose to limit the amount of meat they eat, making them “semi-vegetarians” or “flexitarians.” Some eat no meat other than fish and are called “pescetarians.” “Vegetarian” typically describes those who abstain from meat (including red meat, poultry, and seafood). “Lacto-vegetarians” are vegetarians who also abstain from eggs but not dairy, while “ovo-vegetarians” are vegetarians who abstain from dairy but not eggs. “Vegan” is used to describe vegetarians who abstain from both dairy and eggs (and, depending on one’s personal definition, often other animal-derived products, such as gelatin and honey). As McDougall suggests, a healthful vegetarian or even vegan diet is about what you choose to eat as much as what you choose not to eat, which is why a “whole-food, plant-based diet” has become the catchphrase for this healthful approach to eating.

Ultimately, the decisions each of us makes throughout the day give us the opportunity to create the future of food—and the world—by voting with our forks. The 1960s taught us that “the personal is political” and that how we choose to live our lives is our statement of who we are. “We are what we eat” sums this up succinctly. Believing the dictum that “those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it,” this book begins with a broad-brush overview of the roots of vegetarianism and our fast-growing enjoyment of a plant-based diet, by way of a timeline highlighting some of the key influencers and organizations, classic books, notable events, and other milestones that have influenced this shift.





SOME NOTABLE EVENTS IN VEGETARIAN HISTORY


YEAR: ~3000–2000 BCE

EVENT: One of the world’s most ancient religions, Hinduism, teaches that humans should not inflict pain on other animals, leading to the peaceful and compassionate practice (or sadhana, which means “spiritual practice”) of vegetarianism.



“You must not use your God-given body for killing God’s creatures, whether they be human, animals, or whatever.”

—YAJUR VEDA (12.32), SACRED HINDU TEXT



YEAR: ~500s BCE

EVENT: Chinese sage Lao Tzu (c. 604–531 BCE) writes the classic Chinese text Tao Te Ching, which gives rise to Taoism, one of the three primary religions of China (along with Buddhism and Confucianism), which calls for doing no harm to any other life form.

YEAR: ~500s BCE

EVENT: Greek philosopher Pythagoras (c. 570–495 BCE), the man whose theorem a2 + b2 = c2 rocked the field of geometry, leads what is thought to be the first community requiring a vegetarian diet and is described in Ovid’s Metamorphoses as “the first to censure man for eating the flesh of animals.” People who abstained from eating meat were often called “Pythagoreans” before the term “vegetarian” was coined in the late nineteenth century.



“Animals share with us the privilege of having a soul.”

—PYTHAGORAS



“Mortals, refrain from defiling your bodies with sinful feasting, for you have the fruits of the earth and of arbors, whose branches bow with their burden; for you the grapes ripen, for you the delicious greens are made tender by cooking; milk is permitted to you too, and thyme-scented honey: Earth is abundantly wealthy and freely provides you her gentle sustenance, offered without any bloodshed.”

—THE CHARACTER OF PYTHAGORAS, IN OVID’S IN METAMORPHOSES, BOOK XV (8 CE)



YEAR: ~500s BCE

EVENT: After forty-nine days of meditation, Siddhartha Gautama (c. 563–483 BCE) achieves enlightenment, becoming the Buddha and inspiring Buddhism, which forbids harming any living creature, and millions of Buddhist followers who practice vegetarianism. He encourages his followers to eat spinach.



“The eating of meat extinguishes the seed of great compassion.”

—BUDDHA



YEAR: ~500s BCE

EVENT: Prince Vardhamana (Nigantha Nataputta), or Mahavira (c. 540–510 BCE), founds Jainism, one of India’s primary religions, which values animal rights and forbids the taking of life (whether an insect or a root vegetable). Vegetarianism is mandatory for followers.

YEAR: ~400s BCE

EVENT: In The Laws, Greek philosopher Plato (429–347 BCE) notes the relationship between one’s diet and one’s conduct. In The Republic, the character Socrates asserts that the ideal city would be vegetarian, saying that meat is a luxury that leads to decadence and war. He also questions the excessive amount of land needed to raise cattle.

YEAR: 8 CE

EVENT: The Roman poet Ovid (c. 43 BCE–17 CE) writes Metamorphoses, which includes a speech in the voice of Pythagoras, urging abstinence from eating meat and the abandonment of animal sacrifice.

YEAR: ~100 CE

EVENT: Greek philosopher Plutarch (c. 46–120 CE), a vegetarian, writes a number of pro-vegetarian essays, including On the Eating of Flesh. In the nineteenth century, the Oxford graduate and Romantic poet Percy Shelley (1792–1822) will translate them into English and become a vegetarian himself.

“For what sort of dinner is not costly, for which a living creature loses its life?”

—PLUTARCH



YEAR: ~200s CE

EVENT: The Greek philosopher Porphyry (233–304), a practicing vegetarian, revives interest in Plato’s philosophy.

YEAR: 1400s

EVENT: Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), widely considered history’s greatest genius, is one of the first important ethical vegetarians since ancient times to oppose meat-eating on humanitarian grounds. He is said to have frequently bought live birds for sale as food at the market in Florence just to set them free.



“You needn’t be a genius to be a vegetarian, but many geniuses—including Leonardo da Vinci, Albert Einstein, Gandhi, and Nikola Tesla—endorsed vegetarianism.… Andrea Corsali, an Italian explorer, wrote a letter to his sponsor Giuliano de′ Medici in which he noted the meatless diet of the [Indian] Gujurati peoples he observed in his travels. Corsali writes that in addition to avoiding meat, they do not ‘permit among them any injury be done to any living thing,’ and then he adds, ‘like our Leonardo da Vinci.’ ”

—MICHAEL GELB, AUTHOR OF HOW TO THINK LIKE LEONARDO DA VINCI



YEAR: 1699

EVENT: John Evelyn (1620–1706) writes Acetaria: A Discourse of Sallets, advocating the eating of salads and providing what’s been since called “the world’s first A–Z of salad ingredients,” classifying dozens of herbs by their appropriateness for cooking versus being served uncooked.

YEAR: 1732

EVENT: German settlers in Pennsylvania, led by Johann Conrad Beissel (1691–1768), create the Ephrata Cloister, which advocates vegetarianism as a path to spiritual goals and which by its dissolution in 1813 has become the longest-lived commune in America. The physical site is still open for daily tours.

YEAR: 1790s

EVENT: Massachusetts native John Chapman—better known as Johnny Appleseed (1774–1845)—begins his journey to sow apple seeds throughout the Midwest. A vegetarian follower of Christian mystic Emanuel Swedenborg, he is said to have subsisted mainly on foraged nuts and berries.



YEAR: 1809

EVENT: The Reverend William Cowherd (1763–1816), founds the Bible Christian Church (BCC) near Manchester, England, and advocates for abstinence from eating meat. The BCC is now credited as the forerunner of modern vegetarianism.

YEAR: 1813

EVENT: Inspired by Return to Nature, or, A Defence of the Vegetable Regimen by his friend John Frank Newton (1766–1837), Percy Shelley (1792–1822) makes the case for vegetarianism in his essay “A Vindication of Natural Diet,” which argues against the waste of both animal life and valuable land.

“The most fertile districts of the habitable globe are now actively cultivated by men for animals, at a delay and waste of aliment absolutely incapable of calculation.”

—PERCY SHELLEY



YEAR: 1817

EVENT: The Reverend William Metcalfe (1788–1862) and forty other pilgrims from Manchester’s Bible Christian Church (BCC) sail to America to establish the vegetarian sect in Pennsylvania.

YEAR: 1821

EVENT: Martha Brotherton—wife of Joseph, who was a preacher at the Bible Christian Church and a leader in the Vegetarian Society—writes one of the first vegetarian cookbooks, A New System of Vegetable Cookery.

YEAR: 1837

EVENT: The first American book dedicated to the subject of bread, A Treatise on Bread, and Bread-Making by Sylvester Graham (1794–1851) is published. He travels to preach the virtues of whole wheat bread (arguing that to separate the bran from the rest of the wheat berry was “against the will of God”) and vegetarianism, and is so persuasive that his followers become known as Grahamites. He is credited both with influencing New York Tribune founder Horace Greeley to become a vegetarian and with inspiring the creation of the whole wheat flour–based Graham cracker.

YEAR: 1837

EVENT: On March 7, in Boston, William Alcott and Sylvester Graham are among the founders of the American Physiological Society (APS). The organization’s constitution states that “the farinaceous vegetables” are “the best food for man.”

“The APS also moved meat abstention away from religious doctrinal structures and placed dietary reform firmly within the realm of scientific study.”

—ADAM D. SHPRINTZEN, IN THE VEGETARIAN CRUSADE (2013)



YEAR: 1838

EVENT: William Andrus Alcott (1798–1859) writes Vegetable Diet: As Sanctioned by Medical Men, and By Experience in All Ages. This popular book, one of the first American books to espouse a vegetarian diet, includes the chapter “A Vegetable Diet Defended,” which makes seven key arguments for vegetarianism: “1) The Anatomical Argument, 2) The Physiological Argument, 3) The Medical Argument, 4) The Political Argument, 5) The Economical Argument, 6) The Argument from Experience, 7) The Moral Argument.” Alcott advocates replacing meat-based breakfasts with grain-based dishes, such as brown bread (also known as Graham bread), boiled rice, or rye toast.

YEAR: 1838

EVENT: Alcott House, named after educational reformer Bronson Alcott, is established in England as a spiritual school embracing vegetarian principles. It thrives over the next several years, giving rise to the first Vegetarian Society in 1847.

“Asked to write a few words of introduction to Vegetable Diet, I sat down to read it, expecting to find quaint and cobwebby ideas. I found instead, from Alcott and his hundred or so contributors, including philosophers and poets, ideas that are at the heart of the discussion about food today, from academia to tabloid talk shows—comments on health, sustainability, ethics, and even the safety of the food supply.”

—ANNA THOMAS, AUTHOR OF THE VEGETARIAN EPICURE, IN HER INTRODUCTION TO THE 2012 EDITION OF WILLIAM ANDRUS ALCOTT’S 1838 VEGETABLE DIET



YEAR: 1842

EVENT: The word “vegetarian” is used in print for the first time (in The Healthian, a publication of Alcott House) to describe the consumption of only plants, in accordance with the common meaning of the word “vegetable” at that time, which included fruits and grains.

YEAR: 1843

EVENT: The British and Foreign Society for the Promotion of Humanity and Abstinence from Animal Food is formed.

YEAR: 1843

EVENT: (Amos) Bronson Alcott (1799–1888), a relative and neighbor of William Alcott, and his family (including daughter Louisa May Alcott, the future author of Little Women) and followers found America’s first vegetarian commune in Harvard, Massachusetts. The farm is named “Fruitlands.”

YEAR: 1847

EVENT: The first Vegetarian Society is formed on a September evening at a coastal hospital in England. Within a year, it grows from 150 to 265 members, ranging in age from fourteen to seventy-six. Before the end of the century, vegetarian societies form in many other countries, including the U.S. (1850), Germany (1867), Austria (1878), France (1879), Switzerland (1880), New Zealand (1882), Hungary (1884), Australia (1886), India (1889), Ireland (1890), Chile (1891), Netherlands (1894), Sweden (1895), Denmark (1896), Belgium (1897), and Italy (1899).

YEAR: 1850

EVENT: During a time when most people believe illness to be a mystery or the will of God, on May 15 at Clinton Hall in New York City, the Presbyterian minister turned health reformer Sylvester Graham (1794–1851) co-founds the American Vegetarian Society with Rev. William Metcalfe (1788–1862) and Dr. William Alcott (1798–1859, who serves as its first president), with significant support from the Bible Christian Church (BCC).



YEAR: 1853

EVENT: At a banquet held by the American Vegetarian Society, vegetarian suffragist Susan B. Anthony (1820–1906) raises a toast to both vegetarianism and women’s rights.

YEAR: 1854

EVENT: Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862)’s Walden, an account of his experiment in living in solitude on Walden Pond in Massachusetts, is published.



“I have no doubt that it is a part of the destiny of the human race, in its gradual improvement, to leave off eating animals.”

—HENRY DAVID THOREAU



YEAR: 1860

EVENT: John Smith, of Yorkshire, England, writes The Principles and Practices of Vegetarian Cookery, which includes a substantial amount of theory (“being an attempt to prove from history, anatomy, physiology, and chemistry, that the original, natural, and best diet of man is derived from the vegetable kingdom”) as well as several hundred recipes.

YEAR: 1863

EVENT: Ellen G. White (1827–1915), husband James White, and others found what is now known as the Seventh-day Adventist Church in Battle Creek, Michigan. In June, she reports visions from God inspiring her to promote a meatless diet. Three years later, the couple founds the Western Health Reform Institute, which later achieves world renown as the Battle Creek Sanitarium under the leadership of John Harvey Kellogg.



YEAR: 1868

EVENT: Influenced by Sylvester Graham, James Caleb Jackson (1811–1895)’s How to Treat the Sick Without Medicine is published, promoting a fruit- and grain-based diet, such as the one served at Our Home on the Hillside, a Dansville, New York–based sanitarium where he invents the first cold grain-based breakfast cereal, which he dubs “Granula” (Latin for “little grains”), and which serves as an inspiration for the Whites’ Battle Creek institute.

YEAR: 1881

EVENT: Anna Kingsford (1846–1888), one of the first English women to earn a medical degree, writes about the benefits of vegetarianism in The Perfect Way in Diet and helps found the Food Reform Society. She travels throughout Europe to speak out about vegetarianism and against animal experimentation (which she notably managed to avoid in medical school).

YEAR: 1883

EVENT: The first book of vegetarian history, The Ethics of Diet, is written by Howard Williams (1837–1931). It will influence vegetarians from Leo Tolstoy to Henry Salt to Mohandas Gandhi.

“The use of animal food… is simply immoral, as it involves the performance of an act which is contrary to moral feeling—killing.”

—LEO TOLSTOY



YEAR: 1888

EVENT: The London Vegetarian Society is formed, with its own publication, The Vegetarian.

YEAR: Late 1800s

EVENT: A Seventh-day Adventist for much of his life, John Harvey Kellogg (1852–1943) works during his youth as an errand runner for Ellen and James White, after which they sponsor his medical education at an Adventist-run school in New Jersey. Upon graduation, he is hired by—and later heads—the Battle Creek Sanitarium (originally the Western Health Reform Institute). During a time when a typical breakfast might feature sausage and whiskey, the noted surgeon develops for the sanitarium dozens of innovative meatless foods—most notably flaked and ready-to-eat breakfast cereals, which will revolutionize the morning meal within a decade. The sanitarium attracts leading celebrities of the day, including Amelia Earhart, Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, Mary Todd Lincoln, John D. Rockefeller, President Taft, Sojourner Truth, and Johnny Weissmuller. Kellogg becomes the leading promoter of vegetarianism in his time, and the success of the W. K. Kellogg Company (run by his brother Will Keith) inspires the founding of other national companies providing ready-to-eat cereals that often replace breakfast meats.

“There is nothing necessary or desirable for human nutrition to be found in meats or flesh foods, which are not found in and derived from vegetable products.”

—DR. JOHN HARVEY KELLOGG, IN THE NEW DIETETICS: WHAT TO EAT AND HOW



YEAR: 1890

EVENT: After a St. Louis doctor suggests grinding peanuts as a source of protein for elderly patients unable to chew meat, George Bayle begins to sell peanut butter commercially. Five years later, Dr. John Harvey Kellogg registers the first patent for a peanut-based “Process of Preparing Nut Meal,” which is served at the Battle Creek Sanitarium as a healthful meat substitute. By 1899, the U.S. is producing an estimated two million pounds. After being featured at the 1904 St. Louis World Fair, sales of peanut butter skyrocket to approximately 34 million pounds by 1907.



YEAR: 1892

EVENT: Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910) writes his influential vegetarian essay “The First Step” as the preface to the Russian translation of The Ethics of Diet.

YEAR: 1893

EVENT: Ella Eaton Kellogg (1853–1920), wife of Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, writes her first vegetarian cookbook, Science in the Kitchen.

YEAR: 1895

EVENT: New York’s first vegetarian restaurant—the aptly named Vegetarian Restaurant Number 1—is opened by the New York Vegetarian Society in the Hotel Byron on West 23rd Street. (By comparison, in 1897 there are thirteen vegetarian restaurants in London.) Within five years, a chain of vegetarian cafes called Pure Food will also serve meatless meals in Manhattan. Within thirty-five years, a chain of three vegetarian restaurants called Farmfood will serve meatless meals on the west side of Manhattan.

YEAR: 1898

EVENT: The Vegetarians’ Home and Teetotaller Café, later renamed Hiltl, opens in Zurich. Said to be the world’s oldest continuously-operating vegetarian restaurant, it still operates today, and the owners have added a chain of vegetarian fast food spots called Tibits by Hiltl.

YEAR: 1899

EVENT: Influenced by poet Percy Shelley’s poems and pamphlets, animal welfare activist Henry Salt (1851–1939) writes his classic book The Logic of Vegetarianism, which later influences Mohandas Gandhi to renew his commitment to vegetarianism. He also introduces Gandhi to the writings of Thoreau, including Civil Disobedience, which Gandhi cites as a major influence. Salt is considered the first writer to champion animals’ rights, via his 1894 Animals’ Rights, versus mere animal welfare reform.

YEAR: 1900

EVENT: Chicago’s first vegetarian restaurant, Pure Food Lunch Room, opens at 176 E. Madison in the Loop.

YEAR: 1900

EVENT: Noted scientist and inventor (a rival of Thomas Edison, he has been called “inventor of the electrical age”) Nikola Tesla (1856–1943) writes an article titled “The Problem of Increasing Human Energy” for the June issue of Century Illustrated, in which he calls “want of healthful nutriment” the “chief evil,” condemns the inefficiency of raising animals as food, and praises vegetarianism. Over his adult life, he shifts away from meat toward fish and then finally to a vegetarian diet.

“It is certainly preferable to raise vegetables, and I think, therefore, that vegetarianism is a commendable departure from the established barbarous habit. That we can subsist on plant food and perform our work even to advantage is not a theory, but a well-demonstrated fact. Many races living almost exclusively on vegetables are of superior physique and strength. There is no doubt that some plant food, such as oatmeal, is more economical than meat, and superior to it in regard to both mechanical and mental performance.… In view of these facts every effort should be made to stop the wanton and cruel slaughter of animals, which must be destructive to our morals. To free ourselves from animal instincts and appetites, which keep us down, we should begin at the very root from which we spring: we should effect a radical reform in the character of the food.”

—NIKOLA TESLA, “THE PROBLEM OF INCREASING HUMAN ENERGY”





YEAR: 1901

EVENT: The first Vegetarian Society is formed in Russia. After the 1917 revolution, vegetarianism will be declared illegal in Soviet Russia, leading to the closing of its vegetarian societies and restaurants.

YEAR: 1902

EVENT: Pulp publishing magnate Bernarr Macfadden (1868–1955) opens his first Physical Culture vegetarian restaurant in lower Manhattan. Within six years, it is a successful chain with locations in Boston, Buffalo, New York City, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Chicago. He also writes more than one hundred books, espousing a diet made up mostly of fresh fruits, vegetables, and whole grains as vital to good health—a revolutionary concept at the time.

YEAR: 1906

EVENT: After a spate of stockyard scandals, the novel The Jungle, by Upton Sinclair (1878–1968), is published, revealing the revoltingly unsanitary conditions and inhumane labor practices at Chicago stockyards. It becomes an instant bestseller, and fuels both the growing vegetarian movement and the addition of meatless entrees (from omelets to pastas) on mainstream restaurant menus.

YEAR: 1907

EVENT: On September 24, a New York Times article titled “Cancer Increasing Among Meat Eaters… on the Other Hand, Italians and Chinese, Practically Vegetarians, Show the Lowest Mortality of All” reports on Chicago-based Dr. G. Cooke Adams’ seven-year study indicating higher cancer risk among those who eat meat, stating, “Dr. Adams has proved conclusively that diet is a most important factor in the increase in the disease and its death rate.”

“There cannot be the slightest question that the great increase in cancer among the foreign-born over the prevalence of that disease in their native countries is due to the increased consumption of animal foods, particularly those derived from diseased animals.”

—DR. G. COOKE ADAMS, IN THE NEW YORK TIMES (SEPTEMBER 24, 1907)



YEAR: 1908

EVENT: The International Vegetarian Union is formed to unite vegetarian societies around the world and to organize a global conference in a different part of the world every two or three years.

YEAR: 1908

EVENT: The June issue of the Vegetarian Society of Great Britain’s magazine Vegetarian Messenger reports that during a recent bout of mastoiditis, American inventor Thomas Edison (1847–1931) “ceased using meat and went for a thorough course of vegetarianism. Mr. Edison was so pleased with the change of diet that, now he has regained his normal health, he continues to renounce meat in all its forms.”

“The doctor of the future will give no medicine, but will instruct his patient in the care of the human frame, in diet and in the cause and prevention of disease.”

—THOMAS EDISON, “EDISON HAILS ERA OF SPEED,” FORT WAYNE SENTINEL (DECEMBER 31, 1902)



YEAR: 1917

EVENT: The United States enters World War I in April, leading head of the U.S. Food Administration Herbert Hoover to launch “Meatless Mondays” and “Wheatless Wednesdays” to inspire Americans to reduce their consumption of these staple foods to help increase exports to starving allies in Europe. More than 13 million American families—the majority—pledge their participation over the course of U.S. involvement (ending in November 1918). Millions also plant liberty and war gardens, which will later be called victory gardens.

YEAR: 1920s

EVENT: Soy food products, such as soy bread, cereal, cheese, coffee, ice cream, milk, and nuts, are developed and promoted to a wider audience by Seventh-day Adventists such as T. A. Van Gundy (1874–1935) and Jethro Kloss (1863–1923).

YEAR: 1925

EVENT: Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw (1856–1950), a vegetarian who in 1901 famously quipped, “I was a cannibal for twenty-five years. For the rest I have been a vegetarian,” is awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.

“It is nearly fifty years since I was assured by a conclave of doctors that if I did not eat meat I should die of starvation.”

—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW, THE QUINTESSENCE OF G.B.S.



YEAR: 1929

EVENT: A Saturday Evening Post article reports that as a result of “Meatless Monday” and other World War I dietary changes, “Americans began to look seriously into the question of what and how much they were eating. Lots of people discovered for the first time that they could eat less and feel no worse—frequently much better.”

YEAR: 1929

EVENT: The stock market crash of October 29 sets off the Great Depression, a time when farmers are producing lots of food that few can afford to purchase—so Americans go hungry, and farmers start going out of business. This leads to the first Farm Bill, passed in 1933 as part of FDR’s New Deal, and the updated Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938, which stipulates that the Farm Bill be updated every five years, as it is to this day.



YEAR: 1930s

EVENT: Sadie Schildkraut (1899–1981), known as the “mother of cooked vegetarian dishes,” runs a chain of fifteen vegetarian restaurants throughout New York City. Yidisher Vegetarian Society of New York members, who view vegetarianism as a moral philosophy, dine on signature dishes such as mushroom cutlets, protose steak, and creamed beets.

YEAR: 1931

EVENT: Mohandas Gandhi (1869–1948) helps to launch the vegan movement in London on November 20. He credits the writings of Leo Tolstoy and Henry David Thoreau with greatly influencing his philosophy of nonviolence. While other Indian students renounce their vegetarianism in carnivorous England, he is influenced by Henry Salt’s A Plea for Vegetarianism to re-commit to it. After joining the London Vegetarian Society, he is elected to its executive committee and contributes articles to its newspaper.

“I do feel that spiritual progress does demand at some stage that we should cease to kill our fellow creatures for the satisfaction of our bodily wants.”

—MOHANDAS GANDHI





YEAR: 1932–1934

EVENT: In the U.K., the People’s League of Health and the Gowland Hopkins Committee report major problems with the safety of dairy, with a minimum of 40 percent of tested dairy cows being infected with tuberculosis and chronically transmitting it to a huge portion of the country’s human population. (In 1930, 58 percent of a sample of London children test positive for tuberculosis exposure.)

YEAR: 1934

EVENT: Automaker Henry Ford (1863–1947), a vegetarian who believes in reincarnation and is a soybean fanatic, showcases soybean dishes (such as cookies and puree) at the Century of Progress Exposition in Chicago.

YEAR: 1939

EVENT: Jethro Kloss’s book on herbal medicine, natural foods, and home remedies, titled Back to Eden, is published and goes on to sell more than four million copies and to help inspire the natural foods movement of the 1960s and 1970s.

YEAR: 1941

EVENT: The United States enters World War II. Americans are encouraged to plant “victory gardens”—in back yards, front yards, vacant lots, and even public land, from the Boston Commons to San Francisco’s Golden Gate Park (which at one point has eight hundred gardens)—to grow their own food. In 1943, U.S. rations limit families to twenty-eight ounces of meat per week. Over the course of the war, more than 20 million such gardens cumulatively produce more than 40 percent of the fresh vegetables consumed in the U.S.



YEAR: 1942

EVENT: B&H Dairy kosher vegetarian restaurant (mostly meatless, though lox is served) is opened by Abie Bergson and his partner Heller at 127 Second Avenue in New York City. Today, B&H still serves its housemade soups, pierogi, and specialties like vegetarian cutlet with kasha and mushroom gravy, along with a “vegetarian liver” made from eggs, onions, soybeans, and a not-so-secret ingredient: “love.”



YEAR: 1944

EVENT: The term “vegan” is coined by Donald Watson (1910–2005), a woodworker in Britain, to describe vegetarians who do not consume dairy or eggs. He even specifies in his Vegan Society newsletter how it should be pronounced: “Veegan, not Veejan.”

YEAR: 1945

EVENT: The New York Times Magazine runs the story “Heyday for the Vegetarians” on vegetarians’ efforts to convert meat eaters in the wake of meat shortages. Symon Gould, an editor of American Vegetarian magazine, classifies the hierarchy of vegetarians.

“First, and noblest, is the ethical vegetarian, who refuses to eat meat on moral or philosophical grounds.… Second is the religious vegetarian [who] does not eat meat because of the dictates of his religion.… Third is the esthetic vegetarian, who would rather avoid… the grey, parboiled flesh of a dead animal.… Fourth is the scientific vegetarian, who has compared the anatomies of the animal world and has decided that man is by nature a herbivorous animal and not meant to eat meat at all.… And fifth… are the dietetic vegetarians, who eat no meat only because it’s healthier not to.”

—SYMON GOULD, QUOTED IN THE NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE (1945)





YEAR: Post-WWII

EVENT: The United States, which had built ten large-scale munitions factories by the end of the war, sees their production shift from bombs to fertilizers. Agribusiness is born as large-scale farming becomes a chemical-based process.

YEAR: 1948

EVENT: Dr. Catherine Nimmo and Rubin Abramowitz found a Vegan Society in California, which continues to 1960.

YEAR: 1948

EVENT: The Framingham Heart Study is established in Massachusetts to identify the factors contributing to cardiovascular disease. The half-century-plus study spurs the publication of 1,200 articles in leading medical journals on key risk factors such as obesity, smoking, high fat diet, high blood pressure, and diabetes.

“If Americans adopted a vegetarian diet, the [heart disease epidemic responsible for the death of half of all Americans] would disappear.”

—DR. WILLIAM CASTELLI, FORMER DIRECTOR OF THE FRAMINGHAM HEART STUDY, ON THE PBS/SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN FRONTIERS EPISODE “AFFAIRS OF THE HEART”



YEAR: 1949

EVENT: The First American Vegetarian Convention is held in August at Lake Geneva, Wisconsin.

YEAR: Mid–1900s

EVENT: The advent of nutritional science leads vegetarianism to be embraced as a healthful dietary option.

YEAR: 1958

EVENT: After spending his young adult years growing his hair long and living off the land in California as one of about a dozen “Nature Boys,” Robert Bootzin (1914–2004)—later known as Gypsy Boots—opens the first health-food restaurant in Los Angeles, known as the Back to Nature Health Hut, which attracts a celebrity clientele including Pat Boone, Red Buttons, Angie Dickinson, George Hamilton, and Gloria Swanson. Through more than twenty appearances on Steve Allen’s popular talk show and several books, he introduces a wide American audience to the idea of a healthful vegetarian diet and edibles such as figs, garlic, wheatgrass, and “smoothies.”



YEAR: 1960

EVENT: H. Jay Dinshah (1933–2000) establishes the American Vegan Society in New Jersey. His wife, Freya Dinshah, will write The Vegan Kitchen, the first American book to use the word “vegan,” in 1965, and will run the AVS after his death.

YEAR: 1961

EVENT: An editorial in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) asserts that “a vegetarian diet can prevent 90 percent of our thrombo-embolic disease and 97 percent of our coronary occlusions.” The statement is widely reported by vegetarian publications in subsequent years.

YEAR: 1962

EVENT: Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring is published, helping to spur the global environmental movement, including the focus on organic methods of production, and encouraging some to move toward vegetarianism.

“In the diet in the average home, meats and any products derived from animal fats contain the heaviest residues of chlorinated hydrocarbons [i.e., pesticides]. This is because these chemicals are soluble in fat. Cooking does not destroy residues.”

—RACHEL CARSON, IN SILENT SPRING (1962)



YEAR: 1967

EVENT: The Tassajara Zen Mountain Center, the first Zen training monastery outside of Asia, is established in the San Francisco Bay area, with Edward Espé Brown becoming the head cook. Three years later, he writes The Tassajara Bread Book, which features Buddhist vegetarian recipes and goes on to sell a million copies. In 1971, Brown is ordained as a Zen priest. In 1973, he comes out with his second cookbook, Tassajara Cooking. He will later be the subject of Doris Dörrie’s 2007 documentary How to Cook Your Life.

YEAR: 1968

EVENT: Manhattan socialite and radio host Pegeen Fitzgerald sees her book Meatless Cooking: Pegeen’s Vegetarian Recipes published, and it proves popular with the two million listeners of the radio show that she and her husband co-host. Her 1989 New York Times obituary says she headed two animal welfare organizations and “believed deeply in antivivisection and ethical vegetarianism, refusing to eat meat or fish or to wear a fur coat ‘because I don’t want any living thing killed for my own use or pleasure.’”

YEAR: 1968

EVENT: Ten Talents, by nutritionist Rosalie Hurd and her physician husband Frank Hurd, is published, becoming one of the first few vegetarian/vegan resources available. (The 2012 edition of the Genesis 1:29–inspired cookbook is its forty-ninth printing.)

YEAR: 1968

EVENT: The Beatles study transcendental meditation in India. Afterward, George Harrison, John Lennon, Paul McCartney, and Ringo Starr declare their vegetarianism, inspiring others around the globe to follow suit. All but Lennon will remain lifelong vegetarians.

YEAR: 1969

EVENT: On April 1, Silver Star–decorated Marine and World War II veteran Jim Baker (also known as “Father Yod”) opens The Source on Sunset Boulevard, one of the first hugely popular vegetarian restaurants in Los Angeles. It features a menu of items (such as lentil-based veggie burgers) said to be “consciously prepared for the highest vibration” and attracts a celebrity clientele said to include Warren Beatty, Marlon Brando, Julie Christie, Jane Fonda, Goldie Hawn, Don Johnson, John Lennon, Steve McQueen, Carl Reiner, and Donald Sutherland. (In the 1977 film Annie Hall, Woody Allen’s character Alvy Singer visits The Source, ordering “alfalfa sprouts and mashed yeast.”) The restaurant will become the subject of the 2007 book The Source: The Untold Story of Father Yod, Ya Ho Wa 13, and the Source Family by Isis Aquarian with Electricity Aquarian, upon which Jodi Wille and Maria Demopoulos’s 2013 documentary The Source Family is based.



YEAR: 1970

EVENT: The first Earth Day is held on April 22, a bipartisan effort in support of a healthy, sustainable planet, marking the birth of the modern mainstream environmental movement.

YEAR: 1970

EVENT: Frances Moore Lappé writes a seventy-five-page pamphlet making the case for a vegetarian diet. An expanded version is published the following year as the revolutionary book Diet for a Small Planet and goes on to sell more than three million copies. Arguing that “hunger is human made,” Lappé’s economic and environmental rationales against meat—such as that a cow had to be fed sixteen pounds of grain and soy to produce one pound of beef—merged with concerns about global hunger to spur vegetarians and activists to take up the cause in earnest.

YEAR: 1970

EVENT: A year after actor Johnny Weissmuller opens his American Natural Foods store in Los Angeles, Bob Goldberg and three friends (Paul Lewin, still a partner in 2013, and Michael Besancon and Spencer Windbiel, who will move on in 1985) take over its operations, which include a seven-seat juice and sandwich bar. They buy the store and transform the bar into a full-fledged vegetarian cafe, renaming it Follow Your Heart. After they discover their supplier of supposedly eggless mayonnaise to be fraudulent, they end up having to create their own—and the vegan mayonnaise Vegenaise is born. A popular national line of vegetarian salad dressings and Vegan Gourmet cheeses follows.

“Follow Your Heart was a very different scene from The Source [another LA vegetarian restaurant of the day], which was run by a cult led by a real character. We were the opposite of that, preferring to think of everyone as a brother or sister, whether they wore a suit and tie or had long hair or no hair. Even stronger than our belief in vegetarianism was the belief that everyone should be welcomed like they would be when visiting a friend’s home. We’ve never aimed to proselytize or get people to change. Number one, you can’t—and number two, it’s morally wrong, because it disrespects others’ right to choose. We’ve always aimed to serve food that people would enjoy and simply said, ‘Taste this—it’s delicious!’ In 1972, you could get a Love Plate—an avocado sandwich and a cup of soup—for 95 cents. It’s still on the menu today—at $9.50.… Only about 20 to 25 percent of those dining at Follow Your Heart are vegetarian—which is not surprising if you think about what percentage of diners at any Chinese restaurant are Chinese.… When my generation embraced vegetarianism, it was considered radical. But it’s an interesting dynamic that many of today’s Millennials skip vegetarianism altogether and go right to veganism.… The ease with which you can find something to eat almost anywhere today is simply stunning. I know I live in Mecca, but it’s just not difficult to be a vegetarian anymore. What excites me most is not only the dawning of wonderful meatless creativity [as exemplified by restaurants such as Dave Anderson’s Madeleine Bistro and Tal Ronnen’s Crossroads], but also the dawning of the recognition of the relationship between diet and health.”

—BOB GOLDBERG, CO-OWNER, FOLLOW YOUR HEART (CANOGA PARK, CALIFORNIA)





YEAR: 1971

EVENT: Alice Waters founds Chez Panisse in Berkeley, California, where she launches a revolution by rejecting flavorless commercial produce and starting to create her own network of local farmers and other suppliers. While not vegetarian in mission, she is credited as the creator of an alternative food supply that inspires the improvement of the quality, purity, and flavor of vegetables served in the United States, which encourages more chefs to cook with them and more diners to order them.

“During my years at Chez Panisse, Alice Waters had vegetable dishes that tasted so good, but they never had to shout that they were ‘vegetarian’ dishes. You’d see a dish of pizza with nettles and an egg on the menu, and you wouldn’t be thinking, ‘Oh, that’s vegetarian’—you’d be thinking, ‘Oh, that sounds delicious!’ Zuni Café was like that, too. I think that approach was really important.”

—DEBORAH MADISON, FOUNDING CHEF OF GREENS RESTAURANT



YEAR: 1971–1976

EVENT: During Earl Butz’s tenure as Secretary of Agriculture, he implements many broad-based changes to U.S. agricultural policy. Small farmers are told to “get big, or get out,” and many family-run farms go under. Subsidies are instead given to big agriculture, which—aided by new chemical-based fertilizers and technology—has larger-than-ever harvests and produces an unprecedented supply of food. While Americans’ food costs as a percentage of their income fall over the next three decades, healthcare costs rise in similar proportion.

“When I wrote Diet for a Small Planet in 1971, I could never have imagined that four decades on, we’d still face massive hunger, despite enough food for all and 40 percent more produced per person than when I wrote that book!… Since SOFI 12’s [State of Food Insecurity in the World 2012’s] release last fall, the FAO [Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations] has continued to develop its measures and updated its online Food Security Indicators. It now encourages us to see hunger as a range, from the chronic and severely undernourished 868 million to a larger number the FAO calls ‘food inadequate,’ which climbs as high as 1.3 billion people [out of a total global population estimated at 6.974 billion].”

—FRANCES MOORE LAPPÉ, IN A Q&A WITH HER DAUGHTER ANNA LAPPÉ ON HUFFINGTONPOST.COM (JULY 16, 2013)





“All we had to do was find someone to eat this avalanche of cheap, low-quality food. In just two generations, a nation wracked by hunger ate its way into obesity, diabetes, and all sorts of other problems.”

—DIRECTOR CHRISTOPHER TAYLOR’S 2008 DOCUMENTARY FOOD FIGHT



YEAR: 1972

EVENT: Alice Laden, housekeeper and cook to 1925 Nobelist and long-time ethical vegetarian George Bernard Shaw (1856–1950), co-authors The George Bernard Shaw Vegetarian Cookbook with R. J. Minney, featuring dishes such as lentil curry and savory rice.

YEAR: 1972

EVENT: On May 12, UCLA graduate film student Anna Thomas’s book Vegetarian Epicure is published by Knopf, followed by Vegetarian Epicure–Book Two six years later. The two books are translated into multiple languages and sell millions of copies.

YEAR: 1972

EVENT: The feminist collective (and mostly if not entirely vegetarian) restaurant Mother Courage is opened by Dolores Alexander and Jill Ward in New York City’s Greenwich Village.

“I remember reading Anna Thomas’s Vegetarian Epicure, and being very taken with how well-traveled she was and how well she conveyed the sensuality of food. It balanced the compelling politics of Frankie [Frances Moore Lappé]’s Diet for a Small Planet.”

—AUTHOR MOLLIE KATZEN



“We visited Mother Courage restaurant many, many times in the 1970s. When we asked them for help with our plans to open Bloodroot, they opened their books and were enormously helpful to us.”

—SELMA MIRIAM, FOUNDER OF BLOODROOT (BRIDGEPORT, CT)



YEAR: 1973

EVENT: The Moosewood Collective—a restaurant co-founded by Mollie Katzen and others—opens in January in Ithaca, New York, and specializes in healthful natural foods cuisine. It commits to a vegetarian menu the following year. Through its continuous operation for more than four decades and the publication of a dozen cookbooks, it becomes a driving force in creative vegetarian cuisine and is eventually named by Bon Appétit as “one of the 13 most influential restaurants of the 20th century.” In 1977, The Moosewood Cookbook by Mollie Katzen is published, and it goes on to be cited by The New York Times as one of the ten bestselling cookbooks of all time, with more than two million copies sold. Multiple editions of Katzen’s book The Enchanted Broccoli Forest will cumulatively sell more than a million copies.

YEAR: 1973

EVENT: Deborah Santana (wife of musician Carlos Santana) and her sister Kitsaun open Dipti Nivas, one of the first vegetarian restaurants in San Francisco. Over the coming decade, it becomes renowned for its casseroles and veggie burgers at reasonable prices.

“One of the biggest influences on my cuisine was my obsession with international ethnic folk music. I’d visit music festivals as a hobby, as it offered a full cultural immersion in not only the folk music but the food of places like Greece, Turkey, the Balkans, and Israel. It’s how I first discovered tabbouleh, and how things like hummus became mainstream.… I had earned $2.25 an hour cooking at a vegetarian restaurant called the Shandygaff in San Francisco, so my brother and some friends recruited me to come back to Ithaca to help them put a restaurant together, and I ended up staying. When I wrote The Moosewood Cookbook, it was a homespun effort in every way. The original project was collated by hand; it was written in a very private voice for my siblings and cousins and something that I never imagined would become so very public.”

—MOLLIE KATZEN, CO-FOUNDER, THE MOOSEWOOD COLLECTIVE



“Aside from Tofu Cookery (1983), my very first cookbooks were all Mollie Katzen cookbooks, like Moosewood and Enchanted Broccoli Forest. Those were the books that got me started.”

—ISA CHANDRA MOSKOWITZ, AUTHOR OF ISA DOES IT AND VEGANOMICON



YEAR: 1974

EVENT: The first issue of Vegetarian Times magazine is published by its founder and editor—twenty-three-year-old Chicago nurse Paul Barrett Obis, Jr.—who distributes it through health-food stores. By 1987, its paid circulation will grow to 133,000, and by its four-hundredth issue in January 2013, it will hit 315,000.

“The more I embodied vegetarianism, the more I realized that it was not merely diet. It became a spiritual/ethical/compassionate/political/health issue. In short, it became my lifestyle. I could no longer separate my vegetarianism from other aspects of my life.”

—ELLEN SUE SPIVACK, WRITING IN THE OCTOBER 1975 ISSUE OF VEGETARIAN TIMES



YEAR: 1975

EVENT: United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim is quoted in Vegetarian Voice as describing the food consumption of rich countries (which typically eat more meat than other countries) as one of the causes of global hunger.

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: Wishing to introduce Americans to the pleasures of tofu, William Shurtleff and Akiko Aoyagi write The Book of Tofu, which goes on to sell hundreds of thousands of copies. They follow with The Book of Miso and The Book of Tempeh.

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: The Farm, a long-lived (to this day!) spiritual community founded in 1971 in Summertown, Tennessee, comes out with The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook, which plays a key role in popularizing tempeh, soy-based foods, and a vegan diet.

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: Animal Liberation by Australian philosopher Peter Singer is published, giving birth to the modern animal rights movement through condemning factory farming and medical research.

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: A New York Times headline reports “Vegetarianism: Growing Way of Life, Especially Among the Young.”

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: The biannual World Vegetarian Congress is held in Maine, drawing 1,500 vegetarians from across the United States and around the globe.

YEAR: 1975

EVENT: The medical journal Cancer Research publishes a study by Professor Kenneth K. Carroll summarizing other studies in multiple countries, all demonstrating that higher animal fat (but not plant fat) intake is correlated with increased breast cancer mortality.

“If I have to pick the book that had the most impact on me, I would say Peter Singer’s Animal Liberation, since I instantly became a vegetarian after reading it.”

—JANE GOODALL, WRITING IN NEW SCIENTIST (APRIL 16, 2008)



YEAR: 1976

EVENT: Laurel’s Kitchen by Laurel Robertson, Carol Flinders, and Bronwen Godfrey is published. It goes on to sell more than one million copies and is considered one of the first classic American vegetarian cookbooks of this era.

“One of the many popular vegetarian cookbooks, Laurel’s Kitchen (1976), written by disciples of Eknath Easwaran [an Indian spiritual teacher influenced by Gandhi], warned against ‘speedy refueling.’ ”

—FROM THE TEN-VOLUME SOCIAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES (2009)



YEAR: 1976

EVENT: Cornell Class of 1971 graduate Julie Jordan comes out with her first cookbook Wings of Life: Vegetarian Cookery (later to be followed by 1986’s Cabbagetown Café Cookbook, and 1998’s A Taste of Julie Jordan). From 1977 through 1991, she owns vegetarian Cabbagetown Café in Ithaca, New York, which is known for its cashew chili, enchilada del dia, and fresh-baked bread. After the café closes in 1993, its signature salad of greens, chickpeas, broccoli, brown rice, herbed tofu, olives, nuts, and cheeses lives on at Wegmans, where Jordan today oversees the development of the Northeast supermarket chain’s meatless prepared dishes.

“Julie Jordan’s Wings of Life cookbook was our bible at the very beginning.… It was unsophisticated, but honest, and the recipes were for simple food with integrity and flavor.”

—SELMA MIRIAM, FOUNDER OF BLOODROOT (BRIDGEPORT, CT)



YEAR: 1976

EVENT: The organic vegetarian/vegan restaurant Angelica Kitchen opens in New York City. In 2000 its former executive chef (1992–1999) Peter Berley will come out with The Modern Vegetarian Kitchen. In 2003, then-owner Leslie McEachern will come out with The Angelica Home Kitchen, with recipes for signature dishes such as the Dragon Bowl.



YEAR: 1977

EVENT: The U.S. Senate Select Committee on Nutrition, chaired by Senator George McGovern, recommends decreasing consumption of saturated fat and cholesterol while increasing that of fruits, vegetables, and whole-grain cereals. The “McGovern report” causes an uproar in the meat, egg, and dairy industries.

“[Senator George] McGovern later told me that he took more pride in this work than in anything he had ever done, even if it had cost him and some of his colleagues in the Midwestern states their political careers. This was one of my first deeply troubling experiences with the politics of science.”

—T. COLIN CAMPBELL, AUTHOR OF THE CHINA STUDY



YEAR: 1977

EVENT: Bloodroot, a feminist collective vegetarian restaurant, is founded in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Two of the original collective members, Selma Miriam and Noel Furie, continue with the restaurant over three decades, writing two cookbooks (one vegetarian, one vegan).



YEAR: 1977

EVENT: The Natural Gourmet Institute (NGI) is founded in New York City by Dr. Annemarie Colbin on the principle that “what we eat significantly affects our physical, mental, and spiritual well-being.” While not vegetarian in mission, the institute hosts popular weekly Friday night vegetarian dinners showcasing its students’ cooking and produces many influential vegetarian chefs, including Amanda Cohen of Dirt Candy, Tal Ronnen of Crossroads, and vegan cookbook author Bryant Terry.



YEAR: 1977

EVENT: With a huge peach surplus, California legislation prohibiting farmers from selling their produce outside commercial markets leaves tons of peaches to rot. Angry farmers dump them on the lawn of the State Capitol, leading Governor Jerry Brown to finally relax restrictions and allow farmers to sell produce at farmers’ markets, which spurs their proliferation. By 1979, the farmers’ market in Gardena becomes the first to open in southern California, and one of the first few in the state. By 2005, there will be nearly five hundred farmers’ markets in California, and by 2009, five thousand farmers’ markets in the United States. As of 2013, there are 8,144, according to the USDA.



“I moved to New Mexico [in the 1990s] to open a restaurant, but there were some delays, so when one day I overheard someone say he needed help at the Santa Fe Farmers Market, I said, ‘I have some time.’ The next week, I was manager of the market. And it was the best thing I ever did—I met the most wonderful growers.… It’s not easy to grow fruit in this climate—some years we have it, many years we don’t—so it was mostly vegetables. Santa Fe has always been known for its chiles, but there’s much more than chiles in the market. Today, we have heirloom corn that is ground for the most wonderful cornmeal, and by late July we have everything.”

—DEBORAH MADISON, AUTHOR, VEGETARIAN COOKING FOR EVERYONE





YEAR: 1977

EVENT: On October 1, the first World Vegetarian Day is held by the North American Vegetarian Society, becoming an annual tradition to kick off October as Vegetarian Awareness Month, which continues to this day. The following year, the International Vegetarian Union endorses October 1 as World Vegetarian Day.



YEAR: 1977

EVENT: The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition reports on a study of 24,000 Seventh-day Adventists, indicating that males aged 35 to 64 eating a plant-based diet had three times less risk of heart disease than nonvegetarians in that demographic.





A Conversation with Deborah Madison, Founding Chef of Greens Restaurant (1979–1983)


“I’ve never identified myself as vegetarian. When I was a student at the San Francisco Zen Center, we decided as a group that out of respect for the Buddhist principle of not taking life, we would be vegetarian within our community, so that was the way we ate. I took over the cooking for the Center from a good macrobiotic cook, but as we had visitors at our tables, we didn’t want them to have to wonder what they were being served. The goal, for me, was to create food that would be familiar and bring people together at the table. My influences were very classic—Escoffier, Larousse Gastronomique—so it was kind of the reverse of what others are doing today: Instead of whole wheat pancakes, people wanted pancakes that would fluff up, so I switched to white flour. I added butter and cheese to the menu—as this was well before the vegan era.

“When Greens first opened, it was only open for lunch, and we had women [guests] who would say, ‘I’m going to bring my husband!’ And he’d get there at the end of a long day or week and want a steak. But we won husbands over with touches like bringing warm focaccia with rosemary to the table. We also set out roasted almonds wrapped in parchment paper, and it was like unwrapping a present! I got that idea from Elizabeth David’s Salt, Spices and Aromatics in the English Kitchen. And we’d win them over with dishes like Many Layered Crepe Cake, which had layers of fresh tomato sauce or cheese between each crepe—it created a lot of physical drama at the table and gave focus that replaced the lack of meat.

“Greens in 1979 was a very stylish restaurant. I didn’t want it to have any vegetarian clichés, so we didn’t serve sprouts and there were no macramé hangings on the walls. In the early days, the food was pretty cheese-y. Of our early customers, there was only one who didn’t eat dairy, which was so rare that he had his own nickname: Non-Dairy Jerry. Today, that part has really flipped.

“Today—finally—nobody has to make a big deal out of being vegetarian. And I have seen that many people are eating far less meat, and the meat they are eating is of higher quality. I do make it a point to tell people that I am not a vegetarian because I don’t want people to not invite me over. But I do eat vegetarian a lot of the time, and when I’m out on book tour, I frequently order vegetarian dishes, especially if I’m not eating somewhere I trust the other ingredients.”



YEAR: 1978

EVENT: When The Inn at Little Washington opens in Washington, Virginia—70 miles outside Washington, DC—few suppliers are willing to make deliveries. Chef-owner Patrick O’Connell sources produce from dozens of local farmers instead, and by January 2011 the restaurant’s success will allow him to hire the Inn’s own farmer-in-residence to grow specialty produce ranging from haricots verts to microgreens to sweet peas on the Inn’s property to supplement that provided by more than 100 different suppliers, which are spotlighted on the Inn’s vegetarian tasting menu, arguably America’s finest.



YEAR: 1979

EVENT: Greens Restaurant opens in San Francisco under the auspices of the San Francisco Zen Center, becoming America’s first vegetarian fine dining restaurant under founding chef Deborah Madison. It showcases elegant preparations of produce from the Zen Center’s organic Green Gulch Farm in Marin. In 1981, Annie Somerville is hired to assist Madison; she will take over as chef when Madison departs in 1983.



YEAR: 1979

EVENT: The Vegetarian Feast by Martha Rose Shulman is published, going on to win the Tastemaker Award in the Health and Special Diets category.

YEAR: 1979

EVENT: The Vegetarians by Rynn Berry (1945–2014)—which is based on interviews with famous vegetarians such as actors Marty Feldman, Cloris Leachman, and Dennis Weaver, and Nobel Prize–winning author Isaac Bashevis Singer—is published. Berry goes on to author or co-author other vegetarian books, including 1996’s Famous Vegetarians and Their Favorite Recipes: Lives and Lore from Buddha to the Beatles; 1998’s Food for the Gods: Vegetarianism & the World’s Religions; 2004’s Hitler: Neither Vegetarian Nor Animal Lover; and the annual Vegan Guide to New York City.

YEAR: 1980

EVENT: Influenced in part by Peter Singer’s book Animal Liberation, Ingrid Newkirk, with established animal rights activist Alex Pacheco, co-founds People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), which organizes animal rights awareness campaigns.

YEAR: 1980

EVENT: The U.S. Departments of Health, Education and Welfare (now HHS) and Agriculture (USDA) jointly issue seven principles for a healthful diet, in response to the public’s demand for guidelines on diet and health. The principles become the first edition of Nutrition and Your Health: Dietary Guidelines for Americans. They will be revisited every five years to reflect the latest scientific research, although they remain remarkably consistent.

YEAR: 1981

EVENT: Madhur Jaffrey’s World-of-the-East Vegetarian Cooking is published, which goes on to win a James Beard Book Award in the category of Natural Foods/Special Diet.

YEAR: 1981

EVENT: In their report “The Causes of Cancer: Quantitative Estimates of Avoidable Risks of Cancer in the United States Today,” published by the Journal of the National Cancer Institute, Sir Richard Doll and Sir Richard Peto estimate that 35 percent of human cancers (with a “range of acceptable estimates” of 10–70 percent) may be attributed to diet. The results are summarized for the U.S. Congress.

YEAR: 1981

EVENT: Studies published in the journals Cancer and Lancet show that lung cancer among 14,000 smokers is substantially lower among those consuming beta-carotene-containing vegetables. These studies suggest that increased consumption of plant-based foods may reduce cancer risk.

“Whereas earlier thinking [e.g., Doll and Peto’s 1981 landmark report] about nutrition and cancer emphasized the adverse effects of fat and other components in the diet, the most compelling evidence of the last decade has indicated the importance of protective factors, largely unidentified, in fruits and vegetables.”

—DR. WALTER C. WILLETT OF HARVARD SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH, IN “DIET, NUTRITION, AND AVOIDABLE CANCER” (1995)





“If, through some miracle, I decided to resort to a vegetable diet forever, this new book by Madhur Jaffrey, who is to my mind the finest authority on Indian cooking in America, would be my Bible. It is by far the most comprehensive, fascinating, and inspired book on vegetable cookery that I have encountered.”

—CRAIG CLAIBORNE, WRITING OF MADHUR JAFFREY’S WORLD-OF-THE-EAST VEGETARIAN COOKING IN HIS MEMOIR A FEAST MADE FOR LAUGHTER



YEAR: 1982

EVENT: The National Research Council releases its Diet, Nutrition, and Cancer Report, the first major report connecting diet, nutrition, and cancer. Its major recommendations include reducing the consumption of fats and increasing the consumption of fruits, vegetables, and whole-grain cereal products.

YEAR: 1982

EVENT: Charles Stahler and Debra Wasserman establish the organization Baltimore Vegetarians. By 1990, it evolves into the Vegetarian Resource Group, reflecting the national demand for its research reports. The group publishes the Vegetarian Journal and a number of books, including 1991’s Simply Vegan, which sells more than 50,000 copies, and 1997’s Conveniently Vegan.

YEAR: 1982

EVENT: Actor William Shatner narrates The Vegetarian World, a thirty-minute documentary on vegetarianism, produced by Jonathon Kay. Even if Shatner’s jogging suit seems quaintly passé, its major points are relevant to this day.

YEAR: 1982

EVENT: The New York Times publishes Marian Burros’s article “In Defense of Vegetarianism: Seven Yeas,” based on conversations with seven well-known vegetarians, including actors Marty Feldman, Carol Kane, and Dennis Weaver. She writes, “Being a vegetarian in a largely carnivorous society has often meant second-class gastronomic citizenship.… But the situation has improved significantly in the last few years, say a number of well-known people who attempt to follow one version or another of a vegetarian diet. The improvement results, in part at least, from the increase in the number of people who call themselves vegetarians. There are now too many of them to be ignored. The Vegetarian Information Service, a nonprofit educational organization, puts the figure in this country at between seven and 12 million.”

YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Nikki and David Goldbeck’s American Wholefoods Cuisine: 1,300 Meatless Wholesome Recipes, from Short Order to Gourmet is published, leading Newsday to characterize it as “the vegetarian Joy of Cooking” and Vegetarian Times as “a monumental work.” It will be reissued in 2005.

YEAR: 1983

EVENT: In her New York Times article “New Research on the Vegetarian Diet,” Jane Brody argues that “the main question has become whether it is healthier to be a vegetarian than to be a meat eater,” which her column answers in the affirmative.

“On the whole, vegetarians are less likely to be afflicted with the chronic diseases that are leading killers and cripplers in societies where meat is the centerpiece of the diet.… To glean the heart-saving benefits of vegetarianism, consumption of such foods as hard cheese, cream cheese, ice cream, and eggs should be moderate.”

—JANE BRODY, THE NEW YORK TIMES (OCTOBER 12, 1983)



YEAR: 1983

EVENT: The March issue of Vegetarian Times contains an interview with Nobel Prize–winning author and vegetarian Isaac Bashevis Singer (1904–1991), who is quoted as saying, “Vegetarianism for me is a protest… protesting against everything which is not just: about the fact that there is so much sickness, so much death, so much cruelty. My vegetarianism is my religion, and it’s part of my protest against the conduct of the world.”

YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Customer requests for the hearty soup recipes served at the popular Los Angeles vegetarian restaurant lead to the publication of Follow Your Heart’s Vegetarian Soup Cookbook by Janice Cook Migliaccio. Co-owner Bob Goldberg recalls, “We serve three to five soups every day, including one dairy soup and one no-salt/no-oil soup, and have historically given out samples of each so customers could decide which to order. People loved them so much that they’d ask for the recipes, so it was a no-brainer to decide to do a cookbook. Of course, those recipes feature more butter and dairy than we use today.”

YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Physician John A. McDougall writes The McDougall Plan, which embraces a starch-based diet (e.g., beans, bread, corn, lentils, pasta, potatoes, rice) incorporating vegetables and fruits and eschewing animal-based foods and added oils. It is the first book by a Western doctor suggesting that food combining to make “complete proteins” is unnecessary, debunking a myth that is still widespread. He goes on to write another dozen health-related books, which collectively sell more than a million copies.

“All large populations of trim, healthy people, throughout verifiable human history, have obtained the bulk of their calories from starch. Examples of once thriving people include Japanese, Chinese, and other Asians eating sweet potatoes, buckwheat, and/or rice; Incas in South America eating potatoes; Mayans and Aztecs in Central America eating corn; and Egyptians in the Middle East eating wheat.”

—DR. JOHN A. MCDOUGALL, IN HIS NEWSLETTER (FEBRUARY 2009)



YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Marshall “Mickey” Hornick and his partner (and, later, wife) “Chef Jo” Kaucher open The Chicago Diner in Chicago, which serves meatless versions of diner classics. Just after the restaurant’s 20th anniversary, they release The Chicago Diner Cookbook, and on the restaurant’s 30th anniversary in 2013, The New Chicago Diner Cookbook.

YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Chef Michel Bras cooks his first vegetable menu at restaurant Bras in Laguiole, France, and will earn his third Michelin star in 1999. His signature dish gargouillou [pronounced gar-goo-yoo]—gorgeous composed salads featuring dozens of seasonal young vegetables, herbs, leaves, and seeds—will inspire versions by other chefs around the world in the decades to come.

“Vegetables are my life.… Vegetables are much more generous and luxurious than any protein from an animal.… [They] are the portal to the treatment of all other foods.”

—CHEF MICHEL BRAS, AS QUOTED ON GRUBSTREET.COM IN 2011



YEAR: 1983

EVENT: Soy foods pioneer Louise Hagler’s book Tofu Cookery is published.



“Louise Hagler’s 1983 book Tofu Cookery is one of the books that changed my life. After my mom brought it home, she and my sister and I—who all went vegetarian together—started cooking and eating from it, almost every day it seemed. As we’d never shopped or cooked together before, it was the cookbook that brought everyone together. For the time, it had cutting-edge food photography, and everything looked great. I still make the brownies and the barbecue tofu—I even make the tofu balls, which are flavored with peanut butter and soy sauce, every week.”

—ISA CHANDRA MOSKOWITZ, AUTHOR OF ISA DOES IT AND VEGANOMICON



YEAR: 1984

EVENT: Bart Potenza purchases Sunny’s, a health food store and juice bar on Manhattan’s Upper East Side, and renames it the Healthy Candle in tribute to the prior owners’ nightly lighting of candles as a blessing. Over time, it evolves into a full-service vegetarian café.

YEAR: 1984

EVENT: Chef Raymond Blanc opens Le Manoir aux Quat’Saisons in Oxfordshire, England, where he offers a vegetarian menu option. The restaurant goes on to earn two Michelin stars.

“Now, more than ever, eating less meat and more vegetables represents a step toward a healthier lifestyle. This is the future of food.”

—CHEF RAYMOND BLANC



YEAR: 1985

EVENT: Dr. Neal Barnard founds the Washington, DC–based nonprofit Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM), which grows into a nationwide group of physicians and other supporters that promotes preventive medicine and addresses controversies in contemporary medicine, including efforts to reform federal dietary guidelines.

YEAR: 1985

EVENT: Classic Indian Vegetarian and Grain Cooking by Julie Sahni is published. It goes on to win the Glenfiddich Best Cookbook Award.

YEAR: 1986

EVENT: Gene Baur and his then-wife Lorri Houston found Farm Sanctuary in Watkins Glen, New York, which gives rescued factory-farmed animals a place to live. The Sanctuary will expand to 175 acres in upstate New York and 300 acres in northern California.



“For people who say that animals don’t deserve better, I would say that what we do to animals says perhaps more about us than it says about animals.”

—GENE BAUR, IN A TIME MAGAZINE INTERVIEW (MAY 27, 2011)



YEAR: 1986

EVENT: Nutritionist Marion Nestle moves to Washington, DC, to serve as editor of the Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health, a 700-page book released in the summer of 1988. She later reveals that she was told on her first day not to recommend eating less meat or less of any other food category.

“In the industry-friendly climate of the Reagan administration [1981–1989], the producers of foods that might be affected by such advice would complain to their beneficiaries in Congress, and the report would never be published. This scenario was no paranoid fantasy; federal health officials had endured a decade of almost constant congressional interference with their dietary recommendations.”

—MARION NESTLE, IN FOOD POLITICS



YEAR: 1986

EVENT: Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), which got its start in Germany, Japan, and Switzerland, takes root in the United States. Its growth takes off, leading to CSAs in every state, with more than 12,500 farms participating in CSAs by 2007.



YEAR: 1987

EVENT: Yamuna Devi, who had received world-class culinary training from Srila Prabhupada, writes the classic cookbook Lord Krishna’s Cuisine: The Art of Indian Vegetarian Cooking. It becomes the first vegetarian cookbook to win the prestigious International Association of Culinary Professionals (IACP) Cookbook Award.

YEAR: 1987

EVENT: Diet for a New America by John Robbins (son of a founder of the ice cream chain Baskin-Robbins) is published, spotlighting the moral, economic, and emotional price we pay for the food we eat—and championing vegetarianism and even veganism as a cure for world hunger and the environment. The book becomes an instant classic, and Robbins continues to be an influential voice with books such as 1992’s May All Be Fed: Diet for a New World and 2001’s The Food Revolution, as well as at FoodRevolution.org.

YEAR: 1987

EVENT: The International Congress on Vegetarian Nutrition convenes in Washington, DC, with more than four hundred nutritional experts and researchers in attendance. It reconvenes every five years, and starting in 1997 it takes residence at Loma Linda University in southern California, its current home.

YEAR: 1987

EVENT: Deborah Madison, with Edward Espé Brown, writes The Greens Cookbook: Extraordinary Vegetarian Cuisine from the Celebrated Restaurant, which becomes a bestselling classic.

“Edward [Espé Brown] had written the Tassajara Bread Book, and [when I wanted to write my first book] the New York publishing community asked ‘Who’s Deborah Madison?’ I couldn’t get a book deal unless Edward’s name was on it, too. So we co-authored The Greens Cookbook.… I caught up with him a few years back during a visit to Larkspur. He made biscuits, and I was so impressed to see his hands and how they worked the dough, and how very delicious the biscuits were.”

—DEBORAH MADISON, FOUNDING CHEF OF GREENS RESTAURANT



YEAR: 1989

EVENT: Linda McCartney’s Home Cooking is published, celebrating a vegetarian lifestyle shared with former Beatle Paul McCartney. Two years later, she founds her own line of vegetarian foods. After Linda’s untimely death in 1998, McCartney will take up the vegetarian cause in earnest.

“If slaughterhouses had glass walls, everyone would be a vegetarian.”

—PAUL MCCARTNEY, IN THE VIDEO HE NARRATES AT MEAT.ORG



YEAR: 1989

EVENT: In September, Connoisseur magazine names the ten best restaurants in the world, noting that one of them—Alain Ducasse’s Le Louis XV in Monte Carlo, Monaco—features a vegetarian tasting menu.



YEAR: 1989

EVENT: At a meeting of the American Heart Association in New Orleans, the director of Sausalito, California’s Preventative Medicine Research Institute, Dr. Dean Ornish, presents the findings of his groundbreaking study of the effects of a vegetarian diet and lifestyle modifications on preventing and even reversing heart disease. He writes several national bestsellers, including 1990’s Dr. Dean Ornish’s Program for Reversing Heart Disease; 1993’s Eat More, Weigh Less; and 2007’s The Spectrum.

“Life-Style Shift Can Unclog Ailing Arteries, Study Finds… [Dr. Dean Ornish’s] study showed that a vegetarian diet, moderate exercise, and an hour a day of yoga and meditation could produce a reversal of atherosclerosis, a blockage of the arteries that can lead to a heart attack, in men and women who were strict in following the daily regimen. Experts say this is the first study to show that such blockage can be reversed without using cholesterol-lowering drugs or surgery.”

—DANIEL GOLEMAN, THE NEW YORK TIMES (NOVEMBER 14, 1989)



YEAR: 1980s

EVENT: A severe hailstorm wipes out the Ohio family farm of Bob Jones, Sr., and his sons Lee Jones and Bob Jones, Jr. Celebrated chef Jean-Louis Palladin’s request for squash blossoms grown organically leads to the family’s radical decision to focus on chefs’ needs for the highest quality, most flavorful produce as part of their rebuilding strategy. The result is The Chef’s Garden, which today supplies some of the best chefs in America with specialty produce such as microgreens, micro herbs, heirloom vegetables, specialty lettuces, and edible flowers. Their nonprofit Veggie U supplies classroom garden kits and a five-week science program that has been taught in 4,700 elementary and special needs classes across thirty-two states and Washington, DC.

“The quality of the produce that The Chef’s Garden delivers is absolutely unbelievable. They’re always turning us on to something special.… Farmer Lee Jones has been predicting that vegetables would become ‘the next center of the plate item’ for years.”

—CHEF MARK LEVY, THE POINT (SARANAC LAKE, NY)



YEAR: 1990

EVENT: T. Colin Campbell first announces the results of the China-Cornell Study, a groundbreaking work confirming the benefits of a plant-based diet. Jane Brody’s May 8 New York Times article on the study is titled “Huge Study of Diet Indicts Fat and Meat.”

“Early findings from the most comprehensive large study ever undertaken of the relationship between diet and the risk of developing disease are challenging much of American dietary dogma. The study, being conducted in China, paints a bold portrait of a plant-based eating plan that is more likely to promote health than disease. The study can be considered the Grand Prix of epidemiology.”

—JANE BRODY, THE NEW YORK TIMES (MAY 8, 1990)



YEAR: 1990

EVENT: The Savory Way, an illustrated vegetarian cookbook by former Greens Restaurant chef Deborah Madison, wins the IACP’s Cookbook of the Year Award.

YEAR: 1990

EVENT: Sundays at Moosewood Restaurant by the Moosewood Collective is published.

YEAR: 1990

EVENT: Classically trained French chef Jean-Georges Vongerichten, then of the four-star restaurant Lafayette in New York City, comes out with his groundbreaking and influential cookbook Simple Cuisine, which eschews the use of meat stocks in favor of lighter vinaigrettes, flavored oils, and vegetable juices and broths.

YEAR: 1990–1991

EVENT: Drafts of the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s proposed Food Pyramid are reviewed.

YEAR: 1991

EVENT: On January 13, Chicago chef Charlie Trotter prepares a seven-course all-potato menu at the James Beard House in New York City, which is thought to be the first meatless (and likely the first vegetarian) meal ever served there. Some of the dishes include a terrine of potato and sauerkraut with chèvre cream, new potato and sweetcorn risotto with corn consommé and crispy sweet potatoes, and potato-black truffle ice cream.

“We do a vegetable degustation menu at the restaurant that now accounts for about 20 percent of our orders.… Many of the dishes we served on the potato menu were originally on the vegetable menu.”

—CHARLIE TROTTER, AS QUOTED IN NATION’S RESTAURANT NEWS (FEBRUARY 25, 1991)



YEAR: 1991

EVENT: Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn, Jr., of the Cleveland Clinic presents his ground-breaking five-year longitudinal study of dramatically reduced advanced heart disease among eighteen seriously ill patients consuming a diet free of animal-based foods and added oils, at the first National Conference for the Elimination of Coronary Heart Disease, in Tucson.

YEAR: 1991

EVENT: On April 8, The Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) proposes replacing the USDA’s long-time (since 1956) four food groups (meat, milk, fruits/vegetables, and breads/cereals) with their New Four Food Groups—whole grains, vegetables, legumes, and fruits—based on decades of peer-reviewed studies establishing the value of a plant-based diet.

YEAR: 1991

EVENT: On April 27, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) withdraws its proposed Eating Right Pyramid Food Guide under pressure from the meat and dairy industries, bringing to light the conflict of interest of its dual mandates to promote agriculture and to inform the public on nutrition.

“This [April 27] incident also highlights the inherent conflict of interest in the Department of Agriculture’s dual mandates to promote U.S. agricultural products and to advise the public about healthy food choices.”

—MARION NESTLE, VIA AN ABSTRACT OF HER ARTICLE “FOOD LOBBIES, THE FOOD PYRAMID, AND U.S. NUTRITION POLICY” IN THE INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HEALTH SERVICES (1993)



YEAR: 1991

EVENT: Zen Palate, a hip vegetarian restaurant, opens in Manhattan’s theater district. Years later, it will be described as “the granddaddy of Pan-Asian vegetarian restaurants in New York City.”

“Zen Palate is a rare and oddball treasure, a special taste—somewhere between loving Tom Waits’ singing and eating rose petals for breakfast. And yet everyone I’ve taken there has seemed enchanted.… The food is eclectic, too, quite Chinese and a little Japanese with a hint of Indonesia, hometown healthful meets nouvelle cuisine.”

—GAEL GREENE, IN HER MAY 28, 1991, NEW YORK MAGAZINE REVIEW, WHICH SHE RECALLS IN 2013 AS THE ONLY VEGETARIAN RESTAURANT SHE EVER REVIEWED IN MORE THAN FOUR DECADES AS A RESTAURANT CRITIC





YEAR: 1991

EVENT: The Now and Zen Epicure: Gourmet Vegan Recipes for the Enlightened Palate by San Francisco’s Now and Zen Bakery founder Miyoko Nishimoto (later Schinner) is published. She will follow it with 1999’s vegetarian Japanese Cooking, as well as 2012’s bestselling Artisanal Vegan Cheese, which spurs home cooks and professional chefs alike to experiment with vegan cheese-making.

YEAR: 1991

EVENT: Friendly Foods by Brother Ron Pickarski, a Franciscan monk, is published, focusing on whole grains, vegetables, legumes, sea vegetables, and various other so-called “friendly” foods that “do not bear the high environmental, economic, and nutritional costs of meat and processed foods.”

YEAR: 1991

EVENT: The National Restaurant Association (NRA) commissions its first survey on meatless menu options, with “astounding” results. Twenty percent of American adults responded that they were “likely or very likely” to choose a restaurant with vegetarian options, based on health concerns and taste preferences.

YEAR: 1992

EVENT: As interest in classic French restaurants slows, Hubert Keller’s renowned restaurant Fleur de Lys in San Francisco replaces butter and cream with vegetable stocks and purees and offers a five-course vegetarian tasting menu. Cardiologist Dr. Dean Ornish taps Keller for recipes to include in his heart-healthy cookbook Eat More, Weigh Less.

YEAR: 1992

EVENT: In June, the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture introduces the Food Pyramid as the government’s primary food group symbol representing a nutritious diet.

YEAR: 1992

EVENT: Recipes from an Ecological Kitchen by Lorna Sass is published. It is later reissued as Lorna Sass’s Complete Vegetarian Kitchen, which Mollie Katzen characterizes as “the best vegan cookbook.”

YEAR: 1993

EVENT: Healthy Candle owner Bart Potenza and his nutritionist partner, Joy Pierson, play the lottery (using the numbers of both their birthdays) on Friday the 13th—winning $53,000. The proceeds are used to create Candle Cafe (1994) and, a decade later, Candle 79 (2003), considered two of the very best fine-dining vegan restaurants in America.



YEAR: 1993

EVENT: In June, Ann Gentry opens the organic, plant-based restaurant Real Food Daily in Santa Monica. Additional locations in West Hollywood and Pasadena will follow.

“Ann Gentry [has come up with] a cuisine that is as interesting and delicious as it is healthful.”

—BON APPÉTIT



YEAR: 1994

EVENT: On the heels of the success of its sister restaurant Milly’s in San Rafael, California, San Francisco’s Millennium opens as a fine-dining vegetarian restaurant under executive chef Eric Tucker. In 1998, Tucker co-authors The Millennium Cookbook and in 2003, The Artful Vegan.

YEAR: 1994

EVENT: Chef Tanya Petrovna opens Native Foods in Palm Springs, California. In November/December 2009, Vegetarian Times will describe it as “the vegan restaurant with a global consciousness” which “has expanded into eight locations in Southern California, with plans to grow a dozen more branches reaching beyond the Golden State.” In 2010, the vegan fast-casual chain will be acquired by a couple, Andrea McGinty and Daniel Dolan, who move the California company’s national headquarters to Chicago and forecast 2011 sales at its multiple locations to be $15 million. In 2013, the company will project having forty-five locations operating in both existing and new markets (e.g., Baltimore, Dallas, and Philadelphia) by the end of 2014, and two hundred locations by 2017.



YEAR: 1994

EVENT: World Vegan Day’s first annual celebration is held on November 1, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the Vegan Society.

YEAR: 1995

EVENT: The film Babe, starring twenty-year vegetarian James Cromwell, debuts. On the heels of the Oscar-nominated film’s success, Cromwell campaigns against animal cruelty toward pigs.

“Start with one meal a day, then up it to one day a week, then one week a month. Work your way into not consuming animals and animal products and inform yourself. It doesn’t take anything at all, and it’s very easy to do. Then you start to think, ‘What else?’ This process begins your consciousness.”

—VEGETARIAN ACTOR JAMES CROMWELL, WHO BECAME A VEGAN AFTER MAKING BABE



YEAR: 1996

EVENT: A fourth-generation dairy farmer and cattle rancher turned vegetarian and food-safety activist, Howard Lyman makes comments on The Oprah Winfrey Show that lead Oprah to publicly swear off hamburgers. The National Cattlemen’s Beef Association sues Lyman and Winfrey, although both are found not guilty of any wrongdoing in 1998. Lyman comes out with a 1998 book on dangerous practices of the cattle and dairy industries entitled Mad Cowboy: Plain Truth from the Cattle Rancher Who Won’t Eat Meat.

“I felt better knowing that there was one answer to many of the different ills afflicting both ourselves and our environment. Everything revolved around the fork.”

—HOWARD LYMAN, IN MAD COWBOY (1998)



YEAR: 1996

EVENT: Joseph Connelly launches the Syracuse Area Vegetarian Education Society and a twenty-eight-page newspaper tabloid. Four years later, he teams with Colleen Holland to turn it into a glossy, four-color magazine called VegNews.

YEAR: 1996

EVENT: Husband-and-wife vegetarians Jeff and Sabrina Nelson found VegSource.com, which celebrates vegetarianism. Within five years, it will be ranked the number-one food-oriented site on the web.

YEAR: 1996

EVENT: Two years after the publication of his eponymous first cookbook, Chicago chef Charlie Trotter comes out with his book Charlie Trotter’s Vegetables.

“I have always considered vegetable cookery the most interesting part of cuisine. Vegetables provide an incredible depth and complexity in both flavor and texture, not to mention an extraordinary range of colors and shapes.… I just happen to be in love with the experience of touching, cooking, and eating the multitude of vegetables, fruits, legumes, and grains. It is sincerely one of the most sensual joys of my life.”

—CHARLIE TROTTER, IN CHARLIE TROTTER’S VEGETABLES (1996)



YEAR: 1996

EVENT: Seven-year-old Ristorante Joia restaurant in Milan becomes the first vegetarian restaurant in Europe to win a Michelin star.

YEAR: 1997

EVENT: On May 23, Didi Emmons’s book Vegetarian Planet is published. It goes on to sell more than 200,000 copies.

YEAR: 1997

EVENT: Erik Marcus’s book Vegan: The New Ethics of Eating is published. Eleven years later, he will run the website Vegan.com.

YEAR: 1997

EVENT: Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone by Deborah Madison is published. The following year, it is named “Cookbook of the Year” by the International Association of Culinary Professionals (IACP) and wins the James Beard Book Award for Best Vegetarian Cookbook, becoming one of the year’s bestselling cookbooks.

YEAR: 1998

EVENT: In May, Vegetarian Times reports on the proliferation of vegetarian tasting menus at upscale restaurants across America. Restaurants cited as examples include Aquavit (NYC), Cascabel (NYC), Chanterelles (Philadelphia), Charlie Trotter’s (Chicago), Fleur de Lys (San Francisco), French Laundry (Yountville, CA), Jojo (NYC), La Grenouille (NYC), Lespinasse (NYC), Patina (Los Angeles), Restaurant DANIEL (NYC), Seeger’s (Atlanta), and Verbena (NYC).

“Now, vegetarians are not only accommodated but celebrated with a recent menu renovation called the vegetarian tasting.… [Chef Gray Kunz] says that over the last decade the growth of farmers markets in urban areas has made it easier and more appealing for chefs to work with seasonal vegetables.… ‘Meat is probably the most boring ingredient to work with,’ [chef Thomas Keller] says with some disdain, ‘but the possibilities are endless with vegetables.’ ”

—ALICE FEIRING, VEGETARIAN TIMES (MAY 1998)



YEAR: 1999

EVENT: Eric Brent launches HappyCow.com, a worldwide database of vegetarian restaurants, which lists about 1000. That number will increase to 5,500 by early 2014 for the United States alone.

YEAR: 2000

EVENT: For the first time in history, the world experiences a net loss in farmland. Acreage continues to fall annually, as the population continues to rise. Concerns about the logistical impossibility of feeding the world’s population if such rates continue lead to growing worries about global hunger.

YEAR: 2000

EVENT: In October, a court ruling determines that the USDA has violated federal law by withholding documents and hiding financial conflicts of interest. The USDA provides information showing financial conflicts of interest for six Dietary Guidelines Committee members (out of eleven, or the majority), who had financial ties to the food industry.

“Having advisors tied to the meat or dairy industries is as inappropriate as letting tobacco companies decide our standards for air quality.”

—DR. NEAL BARNARD, PRESIDENT, PHYSICIANS COMMITTEE FOR RESPONSIBLE MEDICINE, A NON-PROFIT GROUP THAT FILED A 1998 SUIT AGAINST THE USDA



YEAR: 2001

EVENT: Michelin three-star chef Alain Passard removes red meat and seafood from the menu of his Paris restaurant L’Arpège.

“Alain Passard… is now rightly considered a visionary by the best chefs in the world.”

—CHEF DAVID KINCH, IN MANRESA (2013)



YEAR: 2002

EVENT: On May 14 (the same day as the launch of his album 18), musician Moby (a vegan since 1986) opens the vegan café TeaNY in New York City with his partner, Kelly Tisdale.

YEAR: 2003

EVENT: The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that one in three children born in 2000 will develop type 2 diabetes during their lifetime, concluding that the increase in the incidence of diabetes is directly proportional to the increasing rates of obesity. The study also shows that diabetes significantly reduces life expectancy. For the first time in U.S. history, a generation has a shorter life expectancy than its parents’ generation.

YEAR: 2003

EVENT: The “Meatless Mondays” campaign is relaunched—this time, not as a war effort, but as a way to help people decrease meat and saturated fats in their diet by about 15 percent (or one-seventh). The effort, led by health advocate and retired ad executive Sid Lerner in conjunction with the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health’s Center for a Livable Future, creates awareness of the preventable illnesses associated with excessive consumption of meat. Within several years, it becomes a global campaign involving participants in twenty-three countries, led by Peggy Neu.

YEAR: 2003

EVENT: Dismayed by the lack of vegan cooking shows, 20-something vegetarians-since-sixteen Isa Chandra Moskowitz and Terry Hope Romero launch their own show, aired on community access television in Manhattan and Brooklyn, called “The Post-Punk Kitchen.” While working to start a vegan ’zine called Vegan with a Vengeance, Moskowitz gets offered a book deal that leads her to instead publish her recipes as her first book in 2005, and it goes on to sell more than 50,000 copies in its first two years. Moskowitz and Romero co-author several subsequent books, including 2006’s Vegan Cupcakes Take Over the World and 2007’s Veganomicon, and the two also go on to author other books separately.

“Punk taught me to question everything. Of course, in my case that means questioning how to make a Hostess cupcake without eggs, butter, or cream.”

—ISA CHANDRA MOSKOWITZ, AS QUOTED IN JULIA MOSKIN’S PROFILE OF HER IN THE NEW YORK TIMES, WHICH SHE COUNTS AS HER FIRST MAINSTREAM PRESS (JANUARY 24, 2007)



YEAR: 2003

EVENT: Candle 79 is founded in New York City; it will be considered the grande dame of upscale vegan restaurants.



“I used to live near Seventy-ninth [Street] and Third [Avenue] in Manhattan, so I ate at Candle Cafe all the time. I loved their Cajun seitan sandwich. I also worked at Candle 79 in garde manger during its opening. While it took some of the kitchen staff a really long time to come in to work from Staten Island, I could literally walk the half-block to work in a minute and a half!”

—TAL RONNEN, CROSSROADS (LOS ANGELES)



YEAR: 2003

EVENT: Chicago chef Charlie Trotter and Larkspur, California, raw chef Roxanne Klein coauthor Raw, a coffee table-style book showcasing juiced, dehydrated, and blended fruits and vegetables.

YEAR: 2003

EVENT: The Chair of New York University’s Department of Nutrition, Food Studies, and Public Health Marion Nestle comes out with her groundbreaking book Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health, which goes on to win a number of major book awards. She will later write 2003’s Safe Food and 2006’s What to Eat, and in 2013, Food Politics will be reissued in an updated 10th anniversary edition.

YEAR: 2003

EVENT: Dr. Joel Fuhrman’s Eat to Live: The Amazing Nutrient-Rich Program for Fast and Sustained Weight Loss is published, espousing the notion that health equals nutrients divided by calories—or nutrient density (later popularized by his ANDI ratings seen at Whole Foods)—and advocates a six-week vegetarian diet to kick off weight loss. The book becomes a New York Times number-one bestseller and goes on to sell more than a million copies.



“Even physicians and dietitians… are surprised to learn that… when you eat large quantities of green vegetables, you receive a considerable amount of protein.”

—DR. JOEL FUHRMAN, IN HIS BOOK EAT TO LIVE



YEAR: 2004

EVENT: The American Medical Association reverses its negative stance on a vegan diet, citing many new scientific studies.

YEAR:2004

EVENT: Karen Iacobbo and Michael Iacobbo write the first complete history of vegetarianism in the United States, Vegetarian America: A History.

YEAR: 2004

EVENT: In March, Terces and Matthew Engelhart open their first organic, local, sustainable (and meat-free) Café Gratitude in San Francisco. Other locations will follow in the Bay Area as well as in Los Angeles (2011), as will their organic, vegan, non-GMO Mexican restaurant Gracias Madre in both San Francisco (2010) and Los Angeles (2014). Their daughter Mollie will open LA-based KindKreme (vegan ice cream) and Sage (vegan beer garden), and sons Ryland and Cary will produce the food documentary May I Be Frank?

“It’s amazing what expert spicing can do. Who would miss the lard or meat juices in the refried beans? The mash is so well seasoned you’d almost swear there was bacon somewhere in the blend.… However, the thing that even impressed my persnickety friend was the flan, which was as smooth and creamy as one made with milk and eggs.”

—MICHAEL BAUER, IN HIS TWO-STAR REVIEW OF GRACIAS MADRE IN THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (JUNE 20, 2010)



YEAR: 2004

EVENT: Then-partners Matthew Kenney and Sarma Melngailis open Pure Food and Wine, New York City’s first raw vegan fine dining restaurant. In 2005, they co-author Raw Food / Real World: 100 Recipes to Get the Glow. Forbes will name Pure one of its “All Star New York Eateries,” and it will also appear on New York’s “Top 100 Restaurants” list.



YEAR: 2004

EVENT: After heading the kitchens at Trio in Evanston and his own seafood-focused restaurant, Spring, in Chicago, chef Shawn McClain opens the upscale vegetarian restaurant Green Zebra in Chicago. In 2006, McClain will be named Best Chef: Midwest by the James Beard Foundation.

“This is more than vegetarian food. This is vegetarian food that puts a contented smile on the faces of confirmed carnivores.”

—PHIL VETTEL, IN HIS THREE-STAR REVIEW OF GREEN ZEBRA IN THE CHICAGO TRIBUNE (MAY 15, 2008)



YEAR: 2004

EVENT: Forbes magazine reports that vegetarian food sales have doubled since 1998, hitting $1.6 billion in 2003, with 61 percent growth forecasted by 2008.

YEAR: 2005

EVENT: Southern California-based Veggie Grill is founded by partners Kevin Boylan and T. K. Pillan. By 2014, the fast-casual vegetarian chain will have twenty-six locations in California, Oregon, and Washington State, with plans for continued expansion.

YEAR: 2005

EVENT: Cornell professor T. Colin Campbell and his son Thomas M. Campbell II’s book The China Study: The Most Comprehensive Study of Nutrition Ever Conducted and the Startling Implications for Diet, Weight Loss and Long-Term Health is published, and goes on to sell more than a million copies.

“I’ve been reading The China Study, and enjoying it enormously. Its widespread success is significant, because you can’t unknow something once you know it.”

—BOB GOLDBERG, FOLLOW YOUR HEART (CANOGA PARK, CA)



YEAR: 2005

EVENT: The new Dietary Guidelines mark the first time the USDA acknowledges that not everyone can digest dairy, with a comment about those who “don’t or can’t consume milk.”

“The Vegetarian Resource Group estimates that 2.8% of adult Americans consider themselves vegetarian, up from 2.3% in a 2000 survey. Another 6% to 10% of the population said it was ‘almost vegetarian’ and another 20% to 25% are ‘vegetarian inclined,’ or intentionally reducing meat in their diet, according to VRG.”

—FORBES (SEPTEMBER 15, 2004)



YEAR: 2005

EVENT: Dr. Walter Willett, chair of the Department of Nutrition at Harvard School of Public Health and author of Eat, Drink and Be Healthy, creates a score card to rank who benefits most from the 2005 Dietary Guidelines. “Big dairy” wins with a score of 10 points, “Big beef” comes in second with eight points, while the public’s health comes in third with six points.

YEAR: 2005

EVENT: In December, an irreverent vegan diet book co-authored by a former model and modeling agent is published. Skinny Bitch by Rory Freedman and Kim Barnouin sells more than 250,000 copies within two years. It goes on to be translated into multiple languages and, with more than three million copies in print, becomes the bestselling vegetarian diet book of all time.

YEAR: 2006

EVENT: The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) reports that livestock farming generates 18 percent of the Earth’s greenhouse gas emissions. In contrast, all the world’s transportation systems (boats, cars, planes, trains, etc.) total just 13 percent.

YEAR: 2006

EVENT: Sublime, a vegan restaurant opened in 2003 by animal rights activist Nanci Alexander, which earmarks 100 percent of its profits for animal welfare, reopens after hurricane damage and a hiatus in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida.

YEAR: 2006

EVENT: On the heels of Horizons Café (1994–2005), Rich Landau and Kate Jacoby open Horizons in Philadelphia, which gains many followers in its subsequent five-year run. Staff go on to open their own vegan spots in Philadelphia (e.g., 2010’s Blackbird Pizza and Sprig and Vine, 2012’s Hip City Veg and Miss Rachel’s Pantry).



YEAR: 2007

EVENT: In an article titled “Got Beef? No, and They’re Doing Fine, Thank You,” the Associated Press reports that vegetarian restaurants are growing in number and in popularity, citing as examples Candle 79 (New York), Horizons (Philadelphia), and Sublime (Ft. Lauderdale).

“Once a network of grungy, obscure cafes, the vegetarian and vegan experience in some cities has blossomed on par with its carnivorous counterparts, complete with Zagat ratings and celebrity clienteles. There are between 1,000 and 1,200 vegetarian restaurants in the U.S., almost double the number seven years ago, according to Dennis Bayomi, president of VegDining.com, an online guide to vegetarian restaurants.”

—ASSOCIATED PRESS (APRIL 27, 2007)



YEAR: 2007

EVENT: Dr. Caldwell B. Esselstyn, Jr., comes out with his book Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease: The Revolutionary, Scientifically Proven, Nutrition-Based Cure, which advocates a strict vegetarian diet. It becomes a huge bestseller.

YEAR: 2007

EVENT: On September 28, comedian, political commentator, and talk-show host Bill Maher takes on pharmaceutical companies in his “New Rules” rant, concluding, “The answer isn’t another pill. The answer is spinach.”

“We won’t stop being sick until we stop making ourselves sick.… The government isn’t your nanny—they’re your dealer, and they subsidize illness in America. They have to. There’s too much money in it. You see, there’s no money in healthy people. And there’s no money in dead people. The money’s in the middle: people who are alive, sort of, but with one or more chronic conditions that put them in need of [prescription medications].… The answer isn’t another pill. The answer is spinach.”

—BILL MAHER (SEPTEMBER 28, 2007)



YEAR: 2007

EVENT: On the heels of the popularity of his bestselling book How to Cook Everything, author Mark Bittman comes out with How to Cook Everything Vegetarian. In 2013, he’ll fuel the part-time vegan trend with his book VB6: Eat Vegan Before 6:00 to Lose Weight and Restore Your Health… for Good.

YEAR: 2008

EVENT: Inspired by Kathy Freston’s new book Quantum Wellness: A Practical and Spiritual Guide to Health and Happiness, talk-show host Oprah Winfrey undertakes a three-week vegan cleanse. Her 21-Day Cleanse menu is created by chef Tal Ronnen.

YEAR: 2008

EVENT: Chef Amanda Cohen—who previously cooked at Pure Food and Wine and Moby’s vegetarian restaurant TeaNY—opens her restaurant Dirt Candy in New York City’s East Village. Four years later, it will win a rave two-star review from the New York Times—only the second vegetarian restaurant in history (after Candle 79) to do so. In 2012, Cohen will come out with her popular memoir-cum-comic-book-cum-cookbook: Dirt Candy: A Cookbook: Flavor-Forward Food from the Upstart New York City Vegetarian Restaurant, of which Pete Wells writes in the New York Times, “Humor is so integral to [Amanda] Cohen’s work that she may be the only chef in America who could publish her first cookbook in comic-book form and make the decision seem not just sensible but inevitable.”



“She likes cream and butter and deep-frying, and is big on drizzling and tall garnishes. Many of her dishes are so earnest in their embrace of a single ingredient that you find yourself stopping to really think about that vegetable, as if for the first time.”

—KATE JULIAN, THE NEW YORKER, ON DIRT CANDY CHEF-OWNER AMANDA COHEN (JANUARY 26, 2009)



YEAR: 2008

EVENT: In April, Vegetarian Times publishes its study “Vegetarianism in America,” which indicates that 7.3 million Americans are vegetarians and that an additional 22.8 million say they largely follow a vegetarian-inclined diet.

“The 2008 study also indicated that over half (53 percent) of current vegetarians eat a vegetarian diet to improve their overall health. Environmental concerns were cited by 47 percent; 39 percent cited ‘natural approaches to wellness’; 31 percent cited food-safety concerns; 54 percent cited animal welfare; 25 percent cited weight loss; and 24 percent weight maintenance.”

—VEGETARIAN TIMES (APRIL 2008)



YEAR: 2008

EVENT: On July 15, Napa Valley vegetarian restaurant Ubuntu’s chef Jeremy Fox and pastry chef Deanie Fox cook the first vegetarian dinner in nearly two decades at the James Beard House in New York City. The same year, Jeremy Fox is named one of Food & Wine magazine’s “Best New Chefs.”

“Wow. Sweet peas, tangy mint, crunchy macadamias and buttery white chocolate. Smooth coconut milk, floral Kaffir lime, peppery coriander and sugary watermelon. Creamy Anson Mills grits folded with a spinachy borage puree and a piquant nasturtium foam. Last night I got to eat some of the most exciting, delicious combinations I’ve tasted anywhere, let alone at the James Beard House… Jeremy Fox of Ubuntu in California’s Napa Valley, an F&W Best New Chef 2008 pretty much knocked our socks off. And then his wife—Ubuntu’s pastry chef, Deanie—knocked us all flat with her unbelievable vegan (vegan!) carrot cupcakes with teeny-tiny candied carrots on top.”

—EMILY KAISER OF FOOD & WINE, IN A BLOG POST TITLED “THE MOST EXCITING CHEFS IN AMERICA?” (JULY 16, 2008)



YEAR: 2008

EVENT: On July 17, director Mike Anderson releases his documentary Eating. Two years later, hotelier Steve Wynn watches it on his yacht and immediately goes vegan, buying 10,000 copies of the film to distribute to his employees before bringing in consulting chef Tal Ronnen to help add vegan options to every one of his Las Vegas restaurants (including steakhouses).

“I was kind of intimidated to be brought in to consult with some of the celebrated restaurants at Wynn, one of which had two Michelin stars. I told them right off the bat that I wasn’t there to teach them how to cook—just to show them a few tricks to help them accommodate their vegan diners, like substituting heavy cream with cashew cream, or butter with Earth Balance. It was definitely a collaborative process over two years to come up with vegan dishes that fit each restaurant’s menu, from Italian to seafood.”

—TAL RONNEN, CROSSROADS (LOS ANGELES)



YEAR: 2009

EVENT: In January, PETA names the Top 8 Vegetarian Restaurants in America as Candle 79 (NYC), Dragonfly Neo-V (Columbus, OH), Green Zebra (Chicago), Horizons (Philadelphia), Madeleine Bistro (LA), Millennium (San Francisco), Sublime (Ft. Lauderdale), and VegiTerranean (Akron, OH).

YEAR: 2009

EVENT: In February, Texas firefighter Rip Esselstyn’s book The Engine-2 Diet is published, which describes his putting his unit on a low-fat vegetarian diet, and how every single firefighter was inspired by the health benefits. The book becomes a New York Times bestseller.

YEAR: 2009

EVENT: Spearheaded by First Lady Michelle Obama, in March the White House breaks ground on the largest vegetable garden on its lawn in history, and the first since First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt’s victory garden during World War II. Its mission is educational: to teach children about the healthfulness of fresh, local fruits and vegetables and thereby intervene in the nation’s childhood obesity and diabetes crisis.

YEAR: 2009

EVENT: Jonathan Safran Foer’s Eating Animals is published, which vegetarian talk-show host Ellen DeGeneres describes as “one of the most important books I’ve ever read.”

“Ninety-nine percent of all land animals eaten or used to produce milk and eggs in the United States are factory farmed.… What happens to all of the male offspring of layers [chickens who lay eggs]?… They serve no function. Which is why all male layers—half of all the layer chickens born in the United States, more than 250 million chicks a year—are destroyed.”

—JONATHAN SAFRAN FOER, EATING ANIMALS (2009)



YEAR: 2009

EVENT: In July, the American Dietetic Association, known since 2012 as the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, issues its “Position on Vegetarianism,” which states, “It is the position of the American Dietetic Association that appropriately planned vegetarian diets, including total vegetarian or vegan diets, are healthful, nutritionally adequate, and may provide health benefits in the prevention and treatment of certain diseases.… The results of an evidence-based review showed that a vegetarian diet is associated with a lower risk of death from ischemic heart disease. Vegetarians also appear to have lower low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels, lower blood pressure, and lower rates of hypertension and type 2 diabetes than nonvegetarians. Furthermore, vegetarians tend to have a lower body mass index and lower overall cancer rates. Features of a vegetarian diet that may reduce risk of chronic disease include lower intakes of saturated fat and cholesterol and higher intakes of fruits, vegetables, whole grains, nuts, soy products, fiber, and phytochemicals.”

“While a plant-based diet has been associated with many health benefits—including a smaller risk of death from heart disease, lower LDL cholesterol levels, and a reduced incidence of diabetes, obesity and cancer—the diet has to be ‘appropriately planned,’ as the American Dietetic Association said in its recent position statement on the subject.”

—KATHERINE HOBSON, U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPORT (AUGUST 4, 2009)



YEAR: 2009

EVENT: Actress, conservationist, and activist Alicia Silverstone comes out with The Kind Diet: A Simple Guide to Feeling Great, Losing Weight, and Saving the Planet, which advocates a vegan diet. It becomes an instant bestseller.

YEAR: 2009

EVENT: On November 3, chef Rich Landau and pastry chef Kate Jacoby (currently of Philadelphia’s Vedge) cook the first-ever vegan dinner at the James Beard House in New York City. The menu includes portobello carpaccio with squash bread pudding; fennel-cauliflower bisque; celery root ravioli with charred Brussels sprouts, royal trumpet mushrooms, and a sage-mustard emulsion; salt-roasted beets with peppercorn-crusted tofu; and heirloom pumpkin cheesecake with quince jam and candied chestnut.

YEAR: 2009

EVENT: On November 19, cooking-show host Martha Stewart hosts a “Vegetarian Thanksgiving Special,” with guests including Napa Valley vegetarian restaurant Ubuntu chef Jeremy Fox, Eating Animals author Jonathan Safran Foer, and Food, Inc. documentarian Robert Kenner. Stewart, whose daughter Alexis is a vegetarian, reveals her plans to attend a vegetarian Thanksgiving dinner.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: In January, Dr. Joel Fuhrman brings his ANDI (Aggregate Nutrient Density Index) scores, which measure foods’ nutrients relative to their calorie counts, to Whole Foods Markets’ customers via the chain’s North America-wide “Health Starts Here” campaign, which emphasizes the healthy-eating principles of a plant-based diet: whole foods, low-fat (and the right fats: unsaturated and from plants), and nutrient dense (with high ANDI scores, e.g., vegetables—especially green ones—plus beans/legumes, fresh fruits, whole grains, and raw nuts and seeds).

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: On February 1, The Oregonian’s food editor Grant Butler, a lifelong carnivore, announces his conversion to veganism. The reasons? Butler acknowledges veganism as a fast-growing part of Portland’s food culture, as offering a good challenge, as being a greener (as well as more compassionate and kind) way to eat, and as offering the prospect of kick-starting a little weight loss.

“Yes, I have stayed vegan and love it. Greatest personal gift I’ve ever received.”

—GRANT BUTLER, FOOD EDITOR, THE OREGONIAN, IN A PRIVATE EXCHANGE WITH THE AUTHOR (SEPTEMBER 9, 2013)



YEAR: 2010

EVENT: In her February 7 column in the San Francisco Chronicle, “Vegan Diets Get Some Love,” nutritionist Marion Nestle writes, “Why anyone would question the benefits of vegetarian diets, or diets that are largely vegetarian, is beyond me. People who eat vegetarian diets are generally healthier than people who eat large amounts of meat.”

“Think about it: Entire civilizations—in ancient Egypt, China and Mexico, for examples—were based on wheat, rice, beans or corn as sources of protein. Nutritionists used to believe that vegetarians had to carefully combine plant foods (beans and corn, for example), but now know that variety and calories take care of protein needs.”

—MARION NESTLE, SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (FEBRUARY 7, 2010)



YEAR: 2010

EVENT: In February, talk-show host Ellen DeGeneres is interviewed by Katie Couric on the reasons she became vegan. She cites the book Skinny Bitch and Sean Monson’s 2005 documentary Earthlings, narrated by Oscar-nominated actor and vegetarian Joaquin Phoenix.

“Food, Inc. is like a Disney movie compared to Earthlings.… It’s inside footage of factory farms; 50 billion animals a year are killed. They’re in pain, treated badly, diseased, pumped full of antibiotics. I saw the reality and just couldn’t ignore it. And I’m healthier and happier.”

—ELLEN DEGENERES, ON 2005’s EARTHLINGS



YEAR: 2010

EVENT: Long-time Howard Stern sidekick and new vegan Robin Quivers launches her own YouTube vegan cooking series called “Vegucating Robin.” Three years later, it will spur her vegan memoir The Vegucation of Robin: How Real Food Saved My Life.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: In a May 2 60 Minutes profile of the James Beard Award–winning chef, José Andrés describes meat to host Anderson Cooper as “overrated” and “slightly boring,” adding, “I believe the future is vegetables and fruits. They are so much sexier than a piece of chicken.”

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: On June 22, Chloe Coscarelli wins the Food Network’s televised baking competition Cupcake Wars with four vegan cupcake flavors: Chocolate Strawberry Shortcake, Crème-filled Chocolate Orange with Candied Orange Peel, Ginger Nutmeg Spice with Date Caramel Drizzle, and Raspberry Tiramisu.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: In August, chef Mario Batali announces the world’s first “vegetable butchers” at Eataly, his Italian uber-market in New York City. The first, Jennifer Rubell, a graduate of both the Culinary Institute of America and Harvard, trains a team of butchers to peel, trim, chop, and/or slice customers’ vegetables and otherwise prep them (free!) for easy cooking at home.



“[Meat is] overused… I do agree with Chef [José] Andrés’ sentiment that [meat’s] reign at the center of the plate is waning. Fruits, grains and vegetables are undeniably the future of sustainability and of healthy eating and nutrition in this country and eventually the world.”

—MARIO BATALI, IN THE CHEF’S NATIONALLY SYNDICATED NEWSPAPER COLUMN (JANUARY 17, 2012)



YEAR: 2010

EVENT: At the end of August, Dirt Candy chef-owner Amanda Cohen becomes the first vegetarian chef featured on the national TV show Iron Chef when she takes on Masaharu Morimoto for the title.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: New York City Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg proclaims September 19–26 to be official heirloom vegetable week, and on September 23, Sotheby’s holds its first heirloom-vegetable auction, which brings in $100,000-plus to benefit farmers and educational programs for children on farming and cooking.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: On November 4, BusinessWeek magazine publishes “The Rise of the Power Vegans,” spotlighting the growing number of prominent Americans who have adopted veganism, including former President Bill Clinton, automotive scion Bill Ford, venture capitalist Joi Ito, Whole Foods CEO John Mackey, hip hop pioneer Russell Simmons, Twitter cofounder Biz Stone (who credits a 2000 visit to Farm Sanctuary in upstate New York with his conversion), boxer Mike Tyson, hotelier Steve Wynn, and media magnate Mort Zuckerman.

YEAR: 2010

EVENT: An article titled “Americans Do Not Meet Federal Dietary Recommendations,” published in the Journal of Nutrition, reports that nearly the entire U.S. population consumes a diet that does not meet federal dietary recommendations. For example, 80 percent of Americans consume insufficient fruit, 90 percent consume insufficient vegetables, and 99 percent consume insufficient whole grains. At the same time, overconsumption of solid fats, added sugars, and alcoholic beverages (all representing “empty calories”) is ubiquitous.

“Among the food groups, dark green vegetables, orange vegetables, legumes, and whole grains had the poorest showing, with nearly everyone in each sex-age group failing to meet recommendations.”

—JOURNAL OF NUTRITION (2010)



YEAR: 2011

EVENT: On February 1, talk-show host Oprah Winfrey and 378 of her staff members report the results of their going vegan for a week, which inspires many viewers to take on the show’s Vegan Challenge.

YEAR: 2011

EVENT: In April, a Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) report indicates conflicts between U.S. dietary guidelines (which recommend eating more fruits and vegetables and less meat and dairy) and its agricultural policy, which channels 63 percent of taxpayer dollars directly or indirectly into meat and dairy production, 15 percent into sugar/starch/oil/alcohol production, and less than 1 percent to fruit and vegetable production.

“As a physician, I urge you to shut down federal programs that pump billions of dollars into direct and indirect subsidies for meat, sugar, and other unhealthy products that are feeding record levels of obesity, type 2 diabetes and other health problems that kill and disable millions of Americans every year. Most taxpayers have no idea that they subsidize unhealthy foods.”

—DR. NEAL BARNARD, PRESIDENT OF THE PHYSICIANS COMMITTEE FOR RESPONSIBLE MEDICINE, IN A LETTER TO THE CHAIRS OF THE HOUSE AND SENATE AGRICULTURE COMMITTEES IN CONGRESS



YEAR: 2011

EVENT: In June, MyPlate replaces MyPyramid as the U.S. government’s primary food group symbol.

YEAR: 2011

EVENT: The National Restaurant Association’s “What’s Hot in 2011” survey of 1,500-plus professional chefs indicates that more than half consider meatless/vegetarian entrées and vegan entrées a “hot trend.” Nearly one in four consider meatless/vegetarian entrées a “perennial favorite.”

YEAR: 2011

EVENT: Sixty-five-year-old former President William Jefferson Clinton (b. 1946), whose love of foods ranging from barbecue to hamburgers during his presidency was well known and who had undergone quadruple bypass surgery in 2004 and stent surgery in 2010, speaks out about his veganism, saying that his vegan diet led to his dropping twenty-four pounds. On CNN, Clinton credits his conversion to a low-fat, plant-based diet with inspiration from a number of doctors, including Dr. Dean Ornish, one of Clinton’s doctors for nearly two decades, and Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn, Jr., both of whom have promoted the ability of a whole-food, plant-based diet to prevent and even reverse heart disease.

YEAR: 2011

EVENT: Independent filmmaker Lee Fulkerson’s documentary Forks Over Knives is released, examining the profound claim that “Most, if not all, of the degenerative diseases that afflict us can be controlled, or even reversed, by rejecting our present menu of animal-based and processed foods.” The film features the personal odysseys of Dr. T. Colin Campbell and Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn. (Long-time vegetarian actress Kristen Bell credits the film with her decision to go vegan, stating, “Forks Over Knives outlines an extremely compelling approach to the prevention of heart disease and cancer.”) The following year, Forks Over Knives: The Cookbook by Del Sroufe is published.

“One of the more convincing, radical and politically volatile docus to come out of the burgeoning good-food genre, Forks Over Knives advocates quite convincingly for the adoption of a plant-based diet, the intent being the eradication of the diabetes, obesity and hypertension afflicting an increasing number of Americans.”

—JOHN ANDERSON, VARIETY (MAY 5, 2011)



“Because of the film Forks Over Knives, more people than ever are looking to try veganism. I’m happy to be a part of the Forks Over Knives Cookbook [whose dessert chapter she wrote], because the better people find vegan food, the more people will stay! Because of the low-fat guidelines, which I don’t typically adhere to, I enjoyed rising to the challenge of using nut butters and avocado as fats, which helped to make the desserts really taste like desserts.”

—ISA CHANDRA MOSKOWITZ, AUTHOR OF ISA DOES IT AND VEGANOMICON



YEAR: 2011

EVENT: The Joe Cross film Fat, Sick & Nearly Dead is released, contrasting two men’s journeys to health via drinking vegetable and fruit juices. In its wake, sales of juice—and juice books—boom.

YEAR: 2011

EVENT: A November 7 New York magazine article by Robin Raisfeld and Rob Patronite announces “Vegetables Are the New Meat.… At serious restaurants all over town, carrots, peas, and the like are no longer just the supporting cast—they’re the stars. Move over locavores, here come the vegivores.”



“Ever since [Dovetail] chef John Fraser launched his Monday-night vegetable menu in March, the elegant Upper West Side joint has been fairly jumping on what is traditionally the deadest day of the week, all on account of such proven crowd-pleasers as turnips, parsnips, and salsify.”

—ROBIN RAISFELD AND ROB PATRONITE IN “VEGETABLES ARE THE NEW MEAT,” NEW YORK (NOVEMBER 7, 2011)



YEAR: 2011

EVENT: Filmmaker Marisa Miller Wolfson’s documentary Vegucated, which tracks three meat-loving New Yorkers who agree to adopt a vegan diet for six weeks, premieres at the Toronto Film Festival and wins “Best Documentary.” The audience of four hundred is double the size for that of any other film shown.

“I was amazed at the lengths people were going to in order to live a cruelty-free life. After seeing Vegucated, I understand for the first time ever why people would do this.… It helps me to be able to enjoy cooking for our vegetarian and vegan guests.”

—CHEF MARK LEVY, THE POINT (SARANAC LAKE, NY)



YEAR: 2011

EVENT: Chef Rich Landau and pastry chef Kate Jacoby open the vegan restaurant Vedge in Philadelphia, where it earns accolades as not just one of America’s best new vegan restaurants, but as one of the best new restaurants of the year—period. Their 2013 Vedge cookbook is named one of Entertainment Weekly’s ten best cookbooks of the year.



“There may be no better example of the elevation of humble produce to sexy star of the culinary world than the food at Vedge.”

—COOKING LIGHT MAGAZINE (2012)



YEAR: 2012

EVENT: Publishers Weekly reports that vegetarian cookbooks are being read by others besides vegetarians.

“You don’t have to eat fat to get flavor these days—or any animal products at all. Vegetarian, even vegan, cookbooks are striving to reach more general audiences. And they are succeeding.”

—MARK ROTELLA, PUBLISHERS WEEKLY (FEBRUARY 10, 2012)





YEAR: 2012

EVENT: By May, law school grad Mark Devries raises more than $15,000 on Kickstarter.com to finish his documentary film Speciesism: The Movie. Inspired in part by the argument by Princeton professor Peter Singer’s book Animal Liberation that “no justifications exist for considering humans more important than members of other species” and the growing “speciesism” movement (which considers animal factories among the greatest evils in our history), the film will premiere in 2013.

YEAR: 2012

EVENT: In a May appearance on The Rachael Ray Show, TV talk show host Ellen DeGeneres and her wife, Portia de Rossi, extol the virtues of their vegan diet, including weight loss and the curing of a skin condition (rosacea) after just two meat-and-dairy-free weeks.

YEAR: 2012

EVENT: In press release issued May 23, the International Food Information Council (IFIC) Foundation’s 2012 Food & Health Survey reports that most Americans (52 percent) believe that figuring out their income taxes is easier than knowing what they should and shouldn’t eat to be healthier. Some 76 percent agree that ever-changing nutritional guidance makes it hard to know what to believe.

YEAR: 2012

EVENT: In May, Microsoft founder Bill Gates sings the praises of companies pursuing plant-based alternatives to meat and dairy, saying, “Companies that are taking the animal products… and actually coming up with a way of using largely plant-based materials—soy, peas, a variety of things—to make these things that are both cheaper, probably more healthy, less cruelty involved, less greenhouse gas emissions.” In 2013, his slideshow on “The Future of Food” extols the companies Beyond Meat and Beyond Eggs.

“[Moving toward a vegetarian diet is] important, too, in light of the environmental impacts of large-scale meat and dairy production, with livestock estimated to produce nearly 51 percent of the world’s greenhouse gases.… Flavor and texture have been the biggest hurdles for most people in adopting meat alternatives. But companies like Beyond Meat, Hampton Creek Foods and Lyrical are doing some amazing things. Their actual recipes are secret, but the science is straightforward. By using pressure and precisely heating and cooling oils and plant proteins (like powdered soybeans and vegetable fiber), you can achieve the perfect flavor and texture of meat or eggs. I tasted Beyond Meat’s chicken alternative, for example, and honestly couldn’t tell it from real chicken.”

—MICROSOFT FOUNDER AND CHAIRMAN BILL GATES, ON MASHABLE.COM (MARCH 21, 2013)



YEAR: 2012

EVENT: In July, a Gallup Poll reports than 5 percent of American adults polled consider themselves vegetarian, while 2 percent identify as vegan—marking the first time Gallup inquires about vegan status.

“Almost all segments of the U.S. population have similar percentages of vegetarians, suggesting that most stereotypes of who is and is not the typical vegetarian in American society have little basis in fact. The biggest distinction seems to come in terms of marital status. Unmarried adults are more than twice as likely as married adults to be vegetarians.… Vegans apparently view themselves as different from, rather than a subset of, vegetarians; most of the small number of respondents in the survey who said ‘yes’ to the vegan question had said ‘no’ to the vegetarian question.”

—JULY 2012 GALLUP POLL



YEAR: 2012

EVENT: In August, Shape magazine names its Top 10 Upscale Vegan Restaurants in America, which include Blossom (NYC), Candle 79 (NYC), G-Zen (Branford, CT), Karyn’s on Green (Chicago), Millennium (San Francisco), Plum Bistro (Seattle), Pure Food and Wine (NYC), Real Food Daily (Los Angeles), True Bistro (Boston), and Vedge (Philadelphia).



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In January, Cooking Light magazine names the “Best Vegetarian Restaurant Menus” at chain restaurants. They include Chipotle Mexican Grill, Jason’s Deli, Noodles & Company, Panera Bread, Papa Murphy’s, Pei Wei Asian Diner, P. F. Chang’s, Ruby Tuesday, and Subway, reflecting the widespread availability of vegetarian options even at national chains.

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: On March 4, The Washington Post’s food editor Joe Yonan comes out—as a vegetarian. Yonan writes, “One interview subject, founder of an imitation-meat company, said something along the lines of, ‘The food editor of a major daily newspaper is vegetarian? This is huge!’ And several food journalists have confessed, under their breath, that if it weren’t for their jobs, they’d do the same thing.”

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In March, LA’s public radio station KCRW’s Good Food, hosted by Evan Kleiman, airs its first-ever all-vegetarian show.

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In March, GQ magazine’s Alan Richman names the 12 Most Outstanding Restaurants of 2013, which includes vegan Vedge in Philadelphia.

“Every dish [at Vedge] tasted better than I expected it would. Fingerling potatoes with a creamy—no cream, of course—Worcestershire sauce were intense, an attribute of most Vedge dishes.… All the dishes had extraordinary balance and savoriness. Nothing was absent from this meal, and let’s not forget that meat and fish weren’t present.”

—ALAN RICHMAN, GQ (MARCH 2013)



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: LYFE (short for Love Your Food Everyday) Kitchen, a healthy fast-casual restaurant with a more than 50 percent vegan menu, run by former global president and COO of McDonald’s Mike Roberts, opens its doors in Culver City, California, on March 13. Developing the restaurant’s menu are executive chefs Tal Ronnen and Oprah Winfrey’s former personal chef Art Smith. Roberts says he hopes to franchise 250 locations within five years.

“When President Clinton visited LYFE Kitchen, I had the privilege of sitting down to talk with him, and found him so present and so into what we’re doing. He loved our sweet corn chowder, crispy Gardein chicken sandwich, and baked sweet potato fries.”

—TAL RONNEN, CROSSROADS (LOS ANGELES)



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: On April 18, The Wall Street Journal publishes an article titled “La Nouvelle Veg,” which states, “Haute-vegetarian menus are conquering Europe.”

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In May, P.S. 244—the Active Learning Elementary School—in Flushing, Queens, becomes the first public school in America to serve only vegetarian meals for breakfast and lunch.

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: From May through August, Grant Achatz (whose restaurant Alinea is on Restaurant magazine’s list “The World’s 50 Best Restaurants”) and his executive chef, Dave Beran, serve a twenty-plus-course vegan menu at their Chicago restaurant Next, which since its opening in 2010 has showcased three set menus annually.

“On many plates vegetables can be but an afterthought or quite literally a ‘side dish’—the supporting actor. For our team vegetable driven dishes have always forced us to be more creative. Maybe, we thought, it’s time for vegetables to take the lead.”

—FROM THE VEGAN MENU AT CHICAGO’S NEXT



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: A six-year study of 73,000 members of the Seventh-day Adventist Church (which promotes a vegetarian diet) in the Journal of the American Medical Association reports that vegetarians live longer than meat eaters.

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In June, the vegan restaurant Kajitsu—which specializes in shojin cuisine, an ancient Japanese culinary practice developed in Zen Buddhist monasteries—is awarded two stars from The New York Times. In his review, Pete Wells writes, “When I eat at Kajitsu… I am never shocked to find that I don’t miss meat or fish. When the Japanese have been working on an idea for hundreds of years, they tend to figure out a few things.”



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In its August cover story, Food & Wine magazine declares “Vegetables are the new pork, the new cupcake and the new craft beer all in one. They are the biggest mega-trend ever.” The magazine names the twenty best vegetarian and vegan restaurants in America as The Butcher’s Daughter (NYC), Café Gratitude (Venice, CA), Canteen (Portland, OR), Clover (Boston), Crossroads (Los Angeles), Dirt Candy (NYC), Elizabeth’s Gone Raw (Washington, DC), Gracias Madre (San Francisco), Green Seed Vegan (Houston), Green Zebra (Chicago), Greens Restaurant (San Francisco), Kajitsu (NYC), M.A.K.E. (Santa Monica, CA), Millennium (San Francisco), Natural Selection (Portland, OR), Plant (Asheville, NC), Plum Bistro (Seattle), Sutra (Seattle), Vedge (Philadelphia), and Watercourse Foods (Denver).

“The country’s most exciting chefs have become vegetable worshippers.… Vegetables are the future of American cooking.”

—FOOD & WINE (AUGUST 2013)



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: In October, Travel & Leisure names the best vegetarian restaurants in the U.S.: Café Flora (Seattle), Café Sunflower (Atlanta); Candle 79 (New York City); Choices Vegan Café (Miami); Crossroads (Los Angeles); Dell’z Uptown (Charleston, SC); G-Zen (Branford, CT); Green Elephant (Portland, ME); Kajitsu (New York City); Leaf (Boulder, CO); Mana Food Bar (Chicago); Millennium (San Francisco); Mother’s Café (Austin); Natural Selection (Portland, OR); Plant (Asheville, NC); Sage’s Café (Salt Lake City); Samosa House (Culver City, CA); Vedge (Philadelphia); Vegeria (San Antonio); and Veggie Galaxy (Cambridge, MA). Promoting the list, Travel & Leisure Tweeted, “Best vegan and vegetarian restaurants in America? They’re some of the most innovative in the country.”

YEAR: 2013

EVENT: The November 23 Forbes article “Bill Gates’ Food Fetish: Hampton Creek Foods Looks to Crack the Egg Industry” mentioning “newly turned vegan Al Gore” starts to spread the news of the former vice president’s new diet.

“While [Josh] Tetrick, Hampton Creek’s CEO, hasn’t been able to persuade everyone, it’s the type of people he has convinced that has the San Francisco food startup turning heads. Bill Gates is a backer, handpicking the company as one that could change future food production. Tetrick has raised $6 million to date from the likes of Peter Thiel’s Founders Fund, Vinod Khosla’s Khosla Ventures and environment-friendly billionaire Tom Steyer. Newly turned vegan Al Gore is also circling.”

—RYAN MAC, FORBES (NOVEMBER 23, 2013)



YEAR: 2013

EVENT: On December 4, the Intelligence Squared debate “Don’t Eat Anything with a Face” airs live on National Public Radio (see sidebar), with the team arguing “for”—PCRM’s Dr. Neal Barnard and Farm Sanctuary’s Gene Baur—declared the winner.





A CONVERSATION WITH DR. NEAL BARNARD


“According to a 2009 poll, around 1% of American adults reported eating no animal products [i.e., eating a vegan diet]. In 2011 that number rose to 2.5%—more than double, but still dwarfed by the 48% who [then] reported eating meat, fish, or poultry at all of their meals. In this country, most of us are blessed with an abundance of food and food choices. So taking into account our health, the environment, and ethical concerns, which diet is best? Are we or aren’t we meant to be carnivores?”

—INTELLIGENCESQUAREDUS.ORG


NPR hosted a live debate titled “Don’t Eat Anything With a Face” in front of an audience of more than 400 guests (including me) on December 4, 2013, airing nationally as part of its award-winning Intelligence Squared (IQ2) series and moderated by ABC News correspondent John Donovan.

Clinical researcher Neal Barnard, MD, the bestselling author of such books as Power Foods for the Brain and Dr. Neal Barnard’s Program for Reversing Diabetes and founder and president of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM), joined Farm Sanctuary co-founder Gene Baur to argue for the proposition while researcher/blogger Chris Masterjohn and farmer/author Joel Salatin argued against it.

Audience members were polled electronically both before and after the debate, with each side’s aim being to persuade more voters to shift their position. In the pre-debate poll, 24% of the audience were for, 51% against, and 25% undecided. In the post-debate poll, 45% were for, 43% against, and 12% undecided—with the “for” team declared the winner.

I spoke with Dr. Barnard during the week following his team’s triumphant performance. Here are some of his thoughts:

“When the initial pre-vote was announced, it was very much against us. During the debate, there was a lot of applause for the other side—so I honestly couldn’t tell which way things were going. It was good to see things went the way they did.

“The outcome fits with the times, in a way. Looking at ethical side of things, over the past year or two chimpanzees were basically retired from medical research. Over the past two or three months, people have been giving a lot of attention to orcas and the controversy over SeaWorld [in the wake of the October 2013 premiere of Gabriela Cowperthwaite’s documentary Blackfish on CNN]. People are thinking about animals in a way they never did before. Over the past four or five years, climate change has started transitioning from being controversial to being accepted—and the animal part of that may not yet be at the forefront of people’s minds, but it’s there. And then it seems that every day a new celebrity announces that he or she is going vegan. So, the times do seem to be changing.”





ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS


“While the environmental arguments are quite accurate, most people find them a little too abstract—and they can’t quite use them as a motivator. There’s a diffusion of responsibility, so people think, “This steak that I’m eating isn’t going to affect things very much.” But of course if you put all of the cows in the United States on one side of a balance, and you put all of the people on the other side of the balance, the cows’ mass is much greater than ours. Every last cow is as big as a sofa, exhaling methane hour by hour. And for climate change, that’s a big issue.”





HEALTH CONCERNS


“Health arguments cast a much wider net. People want to lose weight, get their cholesterol down, improve their diabetes, improve their skin, or whatever. However, often people’s commitment to it might be ‘thinner’ than it is if they come to it through an ethical standpoint. If a person feels they can’t eat a chicken leg because they’re eating a living being, that’s not something they’re going to cheat on during the holidays; it’s grotesque no matter what day it is. If a person thinks they’re only doing it for their blood pressure, they may not be so committed. But even that’s not entirely true, because I see a lot of folks who felt that shifting to a vegan diet has absolutely saved their lives, so there’s no way they’re going to cheat on it.

“For older folks—say, over 50—who get news from their doctor that their blood pressure and everything else is not so hot, health issues are bigger for them just in general. Almost invariably, when people go vegan for health reasons, after about a month or so, somebody will say, ‘It just hit me what a weird diet most people eat—they’re eating animals all day!’ So the animal issues start kicking in to them, or they start to get the environmental part. No matter which door a person walks in, eventually the others start to make sense to them, too. [Bestselling author Dr.] John McDougall initially followed a vegan diet only for health—however, a year or so ago, I heard him say, ‘After a while, the animal part starts to make sense.’ ”





ETHICAL ISSUES


“I recognize that if you’re 16 years old, you’re not worried about prostate cancer. Sometimes it’s environmental issues, sometimes it’s health issues, but very often it’s animal issues that well up for young people.

“People are extremely physically perceptive in many ways. Humans have eyes that can detect color, whereas cats and dogs really don’t do that very well. On the other hand, animals are more perceptive in different ways. They have better hearing, for example, and a much better sense of smell. There are dogs who can sniff out cancer. However, people are amazingly imperceptive in relation to the feelings of others. A human being can barely sniff out what another person is thinking when they look into their eyes. I think that we specifically and intentionally don’t see things when they’re pointed out, like the fact that this is actually slaughtering an animal, and not ‘dressing’ them [a euphemism used by the opposing team during the IQ2 debate].

“Dairy is the same way. For many years, I consumed dairy products. Of course there are many health reasons to get away from it—it’s the biggest source of bad fat. But the ethical reasons against dairy are extremely profound. Cows stop producing milk very soon after giving birth, just as lactating women do. So to keep the cows lactating, farmers artificially inseminate them year after year. Half the offspring are male, and what do you do with a male dairy cow? You put him in a veal crate. No civilized person would eat veal—but veal will still be produced as long as there’s a dairy industry.”





THE PRACTICAL SIDE


“Eating vegan [which Barnard has done since 1984] is easier than it ever was. When I first went vegetarian in 1977, health food stores were tiny, dark little places playing folk music, where the cashiers were named Sunshine. The veggie burgers were kind of bready, and if you bought soy milk, it was a powder that you had to mix up like nonfat dried milk. But now when you go into health food stores, they are enormous—and they have every possible product you could ever want. It’s easy, and it’s everywhere.

“Everybody is different. There are some people who kind of drag themselves toward a vegetarian or vegan diet very slowly, while there are others who take to it instantly. There are some who need a lot of support, while others have no trouble at all. It’s like quitting smoking: There are some folks for whom it’s really rough, and there are others who say, ‘I’ve made up my mind—this is it.’ ”





MAXIMIZING FLAVOR:

CREATING A NEW, COMPASSIONATE CUISINE



“I had no idea so much flavor could be delivered without butter, cream, milk, eggs, and other kitchen staples. Chef Richard Landau’s staff must include a benevolent gremlin or a fairy godmother who sprinkles magic dust over the pots and the pans. I had trouble understanding how vegan food had advanced this far and this fast without an accompanying outpouring of acclaim.”

—ALAN RICHMAN, FIFTEEN-TIME JAMES BEARD AWARD–WINNING RESTAURANT CRITIC, IN GQ, NAMING VEDGE ONE OF 2013’s MOST OUTSTANDING RESTAURANTS




“I wasn’t trying to make vegan food. I was trying to make great food.… I still am a caveperson at heart who craves these carnal flame-roasted flavors, and that is what I have always cooked. My goal is to turn people on to what food can be once you take away all the labels.”

—RICH LANDAU, VEDGE (PHILADELPHIA)



Throughout history, people have chosen vegetarianism for many reasons. The most common motivations fall into three primary categories: eating animals isn’t good for you (health), isn’t good for others (environment), and isn’t good, period (ethics). The current generation, however, appears to have pioneered a new reason for the shift away from meat and dairy products: maximizing flavor.

Terrance Brennan, whose twenty-year-old Manhattan restaurant, Picholine, has earned many accolades, including two stars from the Michelin Guide and three stars from the New York Times, and offers one of America’s best vegetarian tasting menus, described to me the process of perfecting his winter squash soup: “I switched from chicken stock to vegetable stock when I realized the flavor of the chicken stock was overpowering the flavor of the squash. And then I switched from vegetable stock to squash stock in order to intensify the squash flavor further,” he said. “And I didn’t stop there—I also came to realize that by adding cream to my squash soup, I was only diluting the flavor of the squash and not adding flavor, so I eliminated it.”



Wait—what? This classically French-trained chef, in the course of creating one of the best winter squash soups in America, had actually made it vegan?

This discovery reminded me of my surprise at learning, while researching The Flavor Bible in the mid-2000s, that French chef Michel Richard had eliminated the meat stock in his French onion soup and replaced it with miso broth, which he found brought as much if not more richness and umami to the soup without overpowering the flavor of the onions. In his 2006 book Happy in the Kitchen, Richard provides recipes for mushroom water and tomato water, which can be used as lighter, vegetarian alternatives to meat stock in sauces.

Just a few decades earlier, when the 1970s movement toward nouvelle cuisine saw a decrease in the use of butter and cream in French cooking, the continued use of meat stock appeared sacrosanct. However, with the publication of Jean-Georges Vongerichten’s groundbreaking 1990 book Simple Cuisine, his use of vegetable stocks, juices, and vinaigrettes in lieu of traditional stocks and sauces gained traction. “I have always been fascinated with the Mushroom Broth [made from caramelized white button mushrooms, shallots, garlic, parsley, and water] and its reduction, which, after a mere 30 minutes, closely resembles a veal stock,” Vongerichten writes in its pages, “and, if reduced further [another 10 minutes, when it becomes a syrup], a veal demi-glace that would take a day to prepare.” The world-renowned chef has since opened Manhattan’s vegetable-centric ABC Kitchen, which serves a deliciously crusty falafel-inspired veggie burger, and Vongerichten has announced plans to open a vegetarian restaurant in 2014.

Likewise, Daniel Boulud’s restaurant menus have always emphasized vegetables. New York’s Café Boulud has long highlighted dishes inspired by the farmer’s market under the heading “Le Potager.” After a 2013 redesign, Boulud’s db Bistro Moderne reopened with a new “Cuisine du Marché” section of the menu that is mostly vegetarian, including a db market salad with kohlrabi and radish and a dish of salt-baked celery root with wild mushrooms, apple confit, and toasted barley jus. His eponymous restaurant DANIEL (one of Restaurant magazine’s “World’s 50 Best Restaurants”) is also vegetarian-friendly and has offered a vegetarian tasting menu since the 1990s. Its November 2013 vegetarian menu included such flavor-rich dishes as lentil velouté with root vegetables, Orleans mustard cream, chive oil, and watercress; and glazed butternut squash with roasted black radish, pumpkin seed oil, and mustard salad.

Indeed, more restaurants from coast to coast and around the world (from Calgary to London to Sydney) have been offering vegetarian tasting menus, making this one of the fastest-growing trends in the industry. Today, it’s virtually expected that every city’s very best restaurants—such as DANIEL, Eleven Madison Park, and Per Se in New York City; CityZen, the Inn at Little Washington, and Komi in the Washington, DC, area; and Mélisse in the Los Angeles area—will accommodate vegetarian and vegan guests. Many kitchens of the elite Relais & Châteaux–affiliated restaurants throughout North America have gone to great lengths to please their vegetarian guests, including Camden Harbour Inn in Maine, Canoe Bay in Wisconsin, Fearrington House Restaurant in North Carolina, Hotel Fauchère in Pennsylvania, Lake Placid Lodge and The Point in New York, and Winvian in Connecticut.

Leading destination spas have also been on top of this trend for years. Rancho La Puerta in Mexico is well known for its mostly vegetarian cuisine, including a signature version of guacamole whose flavor is lightened and enhanced by the addition of pureed green peas (or alternatively asparagus, broccoli, or edamame). Its California sister property the Golden Door’s longtime chef Michel Stroot, who was the first spa chef nominated for a James Beard Foundation Award, has long insisted, “I want my asparagus soup to taste like asparagus—not cream, not butter, not chicken broth. You don’t need butter or cream when you have freshness and intensely flavored ingredients.”

The Lodge at Woodloch in Pennsylvania, which has its own vegetable and herb gardens (plus master herbalist Nathaniel Whitmore, who waxes lyrical to guests on the health benefits of herbs), inevitably offers at least one veg option on its dinner menu, with many more available during breakfast and lunch. Nate Curtis, chef of Rowland’s at the Westglow Resort & Spa in North Carolina, handcrafted two completely different vegetarian tasting menus for us during the first night of our visit, highlighted by two completely different tofu entrees: pesto-marinated tofu with root vegetable risotto, verjus-braised squash pudding, and pecan tuile; and black garlic–marinated grilled tofu with bamboo rice, orange kanzuri broth, radish slaw, and soy sauce. (Nate’s Southern-inspired veg menu the next night kicked off with a whimsical spin on the regional specialty fried pickles.)

A number of high-end chefs are turning their talents to bringing a new level of vegetarian food to supermarket aisles. In 2013, Dan Barber came out with a line of Blue Hill savory yogurts from milk from grass-fed cows; flavors include beet, butternut squash, carrot, parsnip, sweet potato, and tomato and are sold at retailers such as Whole Foods. Diane Forley (who apprenticed with Michel Guérard, Gaston Lenôtre, and Alain Passard before opening her restaurant Verbena) teamed with her chef-husband, Michael Otsuka (who had apprenticed with Michel Bras and Jacques Maximin), in 2009 to create Flourish Baking Company, which offers top-of-the-line pot pies and other baked goods “with a savory twist”—not to mention fresh vegetables, vegetable infusions, and organic whole grains, ensuring equal attention to nutrition and flavor.



There has been a national explosion in vegan bakeries (e.g., BabyCakes, Dun-Well Doughnuts, and Vegan Divas in New York City; Pomegranate Café in Phoenix; Petunia’s Pies & Pastries and Sweetpea Baking Co. in Portland, OR; Sticky Fingers in Washington, DC; Vegan Treats in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania), confectionaries (e.g., Chalk Hill Cookery in Healdburg, CA; Lagusta’s Luscious in New Paltz, NY; Sweet & Sara in Long Island City, NY), food trucks (e.g., Cinnamon Snail in New York City; Homegrown Smoker Vegan BBQ in Portland, OR; and that of Plum Bistro in Seattle, funded via a Kickstarter campaign), and ice cream shops (e.g., FoMu in Boston; Blythe Anne’s in New York City; Maddy’s in Los Angeles). The food they’re turning out is so decadently delicious that it’s winning over non-vegan customers, too—contributing to owners’ reticence to use the monikers “vegan” or “vegetarian” for fear they might turn off potential customers who could be easily won over on the basis of flavor alone.





VEGETARIAN FOOD FAST


It isn’t just higher-end places that are finding new ways of extolling the flavor of veg cuisine: In 2013, Chipotle Mexican Grill started testing an organic, non-GMO vegan option called “Sofritas.” Made from shredded tofu braised with chipotle chiles, roasted poblanos, and spices, it has a texture akin to ground meat and can be added to the chain’s burritos, tacos, bowls, and salads. (Chipotle’s previous test of Garden Blend, a grain-based protein, didn’t lead to a national roll-out.) Shortly before, the company had eliminated the bacon from its pinto beans, with a Chipotle spokesperson telling Consumerist.com, “In testing some recipes, we simply didn’t think the bacon added anything and, by removing it, we make the pinto beans vegetarian.”





FIVE TRENDS INTERSECTING TO FORGE A NEW, COMPASSIONATE CUISINE


“I have long thought of the food at the restaurant as vegetable-driven cuisine where, besides outright vegetarian dishes, the preparations derive much of their identity and character from a liberal use of vegetables, herbs, and grains.… It boils down to preserving clean, explosive flavors—flavors that maintain their integrity and elegance.”

—CHARLIE TROTTER OF CHARLIE TROTTER’S, WHICH HAS BEEN CREDITED AS THE FIRST CHICAGO RESTAURANT AND ONE OF THE FIRST AMERICAN RESTAURANTS TO OFFER A VEGETARIAN TASTING MENU



A number of trends are coalescing to create a new, contemporary way of cooking and eating that sacrifices neither deliciousness nor wholesomeness. My prediction? The coming decade will see the evolution of a new, compassionate cuisine that represents the intersection of the following:

vegetarianism

health

globalization

gastronomy

flavor





VEGETARIANISM: FROM THE MARGINS TO THE MAINSTREAM


“Probably 70 percent of our dishes are vegetarian. We’re moving away from all the meat.”

—DANIEL HUMM OF ELEVEN MADISON PARK, TO GRUBSTREET.COM




“Generally speaking, you’re looking at 70 to 80 percent vegetables or grains [on Blue Hill’s menu] now.”

—DAN BARBER OF BLUE HILL AT STONE BARNS, TO BLOOMBERG.COM



While the percentage of committed vegetarians has remained steady since 1999, the past fifteen years have seen bursts of growth in both more stringent veganism and less stringent flexitarianism. Together, this has fueled a 22 percent rise in vegetarian dishes on American restaurant menus from 2012 to 2013, as reported by Nation’s Restaurant News. Many of America’s best high-end restaurants—such as Eleven Madison Park and Blue Hill—appear to be naturally downshifting the amount of meat they’re serving as their cuisines evolve. And many are also making a pointed effort to promote “Meatless Mondays” at their restaurants (see here).

Centuries after Asian Buddhist monks began their development of some of the world’s first meat analogs—based on soy or wheat gluten, and approximating the appearance, texture, and flavor of various meats (including beef, chicken, duck, pork, and shrimp)—these non-animal proteins went mainstream in the U.S. through the advent of vegetarian Asian restaurants such as New York’s Zen Palate, as well as wholesale suppliers such as May Wah. Other meat, dairy, and egg alternatives that have hit the mainstream are not likely to leave supermarket shelves or the menus of vegetarian and vegan restaurants anytime soon.

The number of dedicated vegetarian and vegan restaurants has also grown at all points along the spectrum, from quick-service and fast-casual chains (e.g., Maoz Vegetarian, Native Foods, and Veggie Grill, the last of which characterizes 90 percent of its customers as omnivores looking to reduce their meat intake through its vegan “Chickin’ ” sandwiches and vegan “carne” asada) to casual-to-midscale spots (e.g., Blossom, Café Blossom, and the Candle Cafes in New York City; Café Gratitude, Gracias Madre, and Real Food Daily in Los Angeles; Root near Boston) to upscale restaurants (e.g., Candle 79 in New York City; Greens and Millennium in San Francisco). These represent a wide range of approaches to meatless cuisine, from naturally homey (e.g., Garden Café in Woodstock; Moosewood Restaurant in Ithaca, New York; and Follow Your Heart near Los Angeles) to diner delights (e.g., Champs in Brooklyn, Chicago Diner in Chicago) to sophisticated (e.g., Crossroads in Los Angeles, Dirt Candy in New York City, Green Zebra in Chicago, Vedge in Philadelphia), and from vegetarian to vegan to raw vegan (e.g., G-Zen in Branford, Connecticut, and M.A.K.E. in Santa Monica).





HEALTH: AN OLDER POPULATION GROWS WISER


“As of 2010, diet surpassed smoking as the No. 1 risk factor for disease and death in America.”

—MICHAEL MOSS, WRITING IN A NOVEMBER 3, 2013, NEW YORK TIMES MAGAZINE COVER STORY ON BROCCOLI



As this book’s Introduction suggests, Americans are finally waking up to the importance of diet and allowing health concerns to reshape what we eat—moving away from meat, eggs, and dairy (not to mention refined and processed foods, and often added salt, sugar, and fat), and increasingly toward a nutrient-dense, whole-food, plant-strong diet. With the aging of the population, we’re getting not only older but wiser—and increasingly seeking out food that’s as healthful as it is delicious.





MEATLESS MONDAYS


“As I started to question what I ate, I realized I ate meat simply because I always had. That didn’t seem like a good enough reason.”

—JOHN FRASER OF DOVETAIL, A NEW YORK TIMES THREE-STAR RESTAURANT OFFERING VEGETARIAN AND VEGETABLE-FOCUSED “MEATLESS MONDAY” MENUS (NEW YORK CITY)

As of February 2014, more than two hundred restaurants were participating in the Meatless Monday program by agreeing to spotlight the meatless dishes on their menus, including

Almond (East Hampton and NYC)

Babbo (NYC)

Benson Brewery (Omaha)

Border Grill (Las Vegas and Los Angeles)

Canyon Ranch (Tucson)

Casa Mono (NYC)

Cookshop (NYC)

Del Posto (NYC)

Dell’Anima (NYC)

Dovetail (NYC)

Gurney’s Inn (Montauk, NY)

Hard Rock Café (London)

Lupa (NYC)

M Café (Los Angeles)

Matsuhisa (Aspen)

Osteria Mozza (Los Angeles)

Pizzeria Mozza (Los Angeles)

SD26 (NYC)

Smorgas Chef (NYC)

Susan Feniger’s Street (Los Angeles)



The foodservice industry’s Sodexo serves more than 10 million meals daily and has established “Meatless Mondays” in more than 2,000 college, corporate, government, and hospital cafeterias.

For more information, visit meatlessmonday.com.



Matthew Kenney found that his classical French training, with its layering of “fat on fat,” was “anti-flavor”: “It masked the flavor of the ingredients, and eating it didn’t make me feel good,” he recalls of the period before his evolution toward an olive oil–based, Mediterranean style of cooking. Then, in his thirties, he found himself sensitive to the way food made him feel and started eating less animal protein. But it was his transition to eating only vegetarian and raw food that he found life-changing. “My aches and pains went away,” he recalls. “I looked and felt younger. And as a chef, this new way of eating and preparing food reignited my passion.”

Kenney went on to open a number of raw-food restaurants, including Manhattan’s Pure Food & Wine (with then-partner Sarma Melngailis) in 2004 and Santa Monica’s M.A.K.E. in 2012, not to mention raw-foods academies in Miami, New England, and Santa Monica. “Most of the food being served in the world is so outdated—it’s more harmful than helpful to people’s health,” Kenney observes. “There’s definitely a correlation between a Bacchanalian approach to food and ill health. But I believe health and wellness and the culinary arts should be friends, not foes. You should not have to compromise.”





GLOBALIZATION: A SHRINKING WORLD’S EXPANDING CHOICES


“The pork-loving chef [David Chang], whose menu once read, ‘We do not serve vegetarian-friendly items here,’… has become obsessed with vegetables.… Chang couldn’t believe dishes prepared without meat, onions, or garlic could have such intense flavor.”

—GISELA WILLIAMS, WRITING IN FOOD & WINE (MARCH 2011) OF CHANG’S EYE-OPENING VISIT TO SOUTH KOREA TO EXPERIENCE THE VEGETARIAN BUDDHIST TEMPLE CUISINE PREPARED BY MONKS AND NUNS, ON THE HEELS OF SERVING A MEATLESS SUMMER VEGETABLE DINNER AT THE JAMES BEARD HOUSE ON AUGUST 20, 2009



As people from all corners of the earth come together to address the problems facing the planet, they are also embracing the diversity of cuisines from around the globe. Food has long been a portable embodiment of culture and a key driver of globalization (think of the spice routes), which continues to expand the range of ingredients, cooking techniques, and flavor profiles of interest today. Long a global melting pot, the United States is the world’s largest spice importer and consumer and has seen spice consumption grow nearly three times as fast as the population over the past decade. Ten years ago, an average American spice rack might have a mere ten spices; it now has forty.

Patty Penzey Erd, who owns The Spice House in the greater Chicago area with her husband, Tom, counts a long list of seasonings that her store couldn’t sell ten years ago and that it can barely keep in stock today, such as asafoetida powder, curry leaves, epazote, mango powder, pomegranate molasses, and tamarind. “These are all things that pair better with vegetarian dishes than with meat dishes, for the most part,” she observes. “Also, curries sell so much more than they ever did before, along with our garam masala mixture, and both work beautifully with vegetable dishes. Last night I attended a dinner for [Milwaukee chef] Sandy D’Amato at [Carrie Nahabedian’s Chicago restaurant] NAHA, where my favorite dish was the garam masala–spiced kohlrabi soup with tamarind-glazed almonds.”

Our evolving cuisine reflects our ongoing incorporation of these spices—in authentic, contemporized, and even melded (i.e., fusion) dishes. As The Flavor Bible points out, cuisine is undergoing a startling historic transformation: with the advent of the global availability of ingredients, dishes are no longer based on geography but on flavor. This radical shift calls for a new approach to cooking—as well as a new genre of vegetarian “cookbook” that serves not to document classic dishes via recipes but to inspire the creation of new ones based on imaginative and harmonious flavor combinations. Thus the book you hold in your hands.





THE VEGETARIAN KITCHEN: ONE WITHOUT BORDERS


“With optimum cooking and seasoning, vegetables have a capacity for flavor that meat simply doesn’t have. If legumes and grains are the backbone of Indian cuisine, vegetables provide the flesh. What we do in India with a plant-based diet that is different from other places is we add flavors in the beginning of cooking, before the vegetables, taking a little oil and adding cumin, coriander, mustard, cinnamon.… With an arsenal of flavorings that are easy to keep all year long, we are able to take boring greens and gnarly root vegetables and make them shine at the table and dance on your tongue.”

—SUVIR SARAN, CHEF AND AUTHOR OF AMERICAN MASALA (2007) AND MASALA FARM (2011)

There’s an entire world of vegetarian cuisine far beyond the bland brown-rice-and-kale fare many omnivores still mistakenly believe defines it. Countries, their customs, and their cuisines are inextricably linked, with each country or region offering its own take on delicious dishes based on vegetables, fruits, legumes, grains, nuts, and seeds—which collectively suggest a world of endless possibilities. Mollie Katzen was a folk-dancing aficionado who traveled to folk festivals where she fell in love with a new world of foods—which is how she ended up tasting her first hummus, tabbouleh, and other Mediterranean and Middle Eastern dishes that would become staples of her vegetarian kitchen and bestselling cookbooks (including the original Moosewood Cookbook, which features more than seventy recipes for dishes like mushroom moussaka, spinach-ricotta pie, and “soy gevult”). Others have drawn their inspiration from different parts of the globe, and I count myself lucky to be able to relish them all on a regular basis from my home base in Manhattan.

Restaurants serving Caribbean cuisine often feature vegetarian options. Believing that human beings are natural vegetarians based on anatomy and physiology and that “you are what you eat,” Jamaica’s Rastafarians opt for only those foods they see as enhancing vitality (the root of the word “ital” used to describe their cuisine). They eat close to nature, often seasoning their food with peppers (and sometimes the herb marijuana, as Indonesians do). I was utterly charmed by the cafeteria-style vegan restaurant Fire & Spice in Hartford, which I lucked into visiting after a Yelp search from nearby Interstate 84; its coconut-milk-enhanced chayote was incredible.

You can almost always find vegetable dishes on Chinese restaurant menus. Those favoring Cantonese-style cuisine should seek out Buddha Bodai (and especially its watercress dumplings and its impressive vegan barbecued “pork”) and the Vegetarian Dim Sum House in Manhattan’s Chinatown. My favorite neighborhood Chinese restaurant was Hunan Manor, which I started frequenting weekly after being turned on to it by qigong master Robert Peng, who confided at a dinner party that—at that time—it was the restaurant whose food most reminded him of home. Two of my favorite dishes there were the Chinese long beans and eggplant over brown rice, as well as the bean curd with mixed vegetables in black bean sauce.

I’ve enjoyed Ethiopian cuisine since college, but I love it even more now as a fun way of eating vegetarian. Because of the culture’s traditional periods of fasting and avoiding meat, eggs, and dairy, every Ethiopian restaurant I know has a vegetarian combination option that includes the spongy pancakes called injera, which are used to scoop up bites of various braised legumes, greens, and other vegetables.

Indian cuisine isn’t an imitation or approximation of an earlier meat-based cuisine—it is an original vegetarian cuisine. Hindus, Jains, and Taoists all advocate vegetarianism, either loosely or strictly, and India is said to have the highest percentage of practicing vegetarians of any country in the world, making Indian restaurants one of the safest bets for vegetarian dining. I’m fortunate to live just a few blocks from Hemant Mathur’s Tulsi, one of the best Indian restaurants in America, and I am confident its ranks will be joined by Suvir Saran’s new San Francisco restaurant (as Saran and Mathur were partners in New York’s Devi, the first Indian restaurant in the U.S. to earn a Michelin star).

Not only did Indonesian cuisine give us tempeh, but its restaurants also invariably offer vegetarian options. Bali Nusa Indah in Manhattan’s Theater District offers several vegetarian combinations showcasing dishes such as coconut-milk-based vegetable stews, corn fritters, and gado gado (peanut sauce over assorted vegetables).

Kosher Israeli restaurants do not serve meat and dairy together, so you can be confident that dishes served in kosher dairy restaurants do not contain meat (although you should confirm that they do not contain fish, which is not considered meat under Jewish dietary laws). Roughly 8.5 percent of Israel’s population opts for vegetarianism, and veganism has been on the rise there ever since Gary Yourofsky’s 2010 “Best Speech You Will Ever Hear” talk at Atlanta’s Georgia Tech was translated into twenty-seven languages and became the most-watched speech on YouTube in Israel.

Pastas and pizzas have long been vegetarian staples, but restaurants like Brooklyn’s Paulie Gee’s and Portland’s Portobello Vegan Trattoria are doing their part to make pizza a vegan staple, too. Now that we Americans have assimilated northern Italian cuisine via restaurants and cooking shows, more and more of us are prepared to make the leap to the idea of farro or other grains prepared in the style of risotto. Boulud Sud in New York City sets the bar for farrotto, while the version of wheatberry risotto we tasted in 2013 at Canoe Bay in Wisconsin (which featured multiple local cheeses and a Parmesan foam) inspired Andrew to duplicate and then elaborate on it at home several times since, using Lucky Dog Farm’s wonderful organic wheat berries.

Enthusiasts of Japanese cuisine welcomed Manhattan’s vegan Michelin-starred restaurant Kajitsu, which specializes in dinnertime tasting menus showcasing seasonal ingredients such as matsutake mushrooms (which are as prized in Japanese cuisine as white truffles are in Italian). Lunchtime is a great value; a composed tray might feature a main dish of ramen noodles seasoned with three different kinds of miso, or rice topped with bamboo shoots, alongside seasonal vegetable accents and perhaps a spring roll or yuba (tofu skin) filled with seasoned rice. Manhattan’s popular Beyond Sushi creates vegan sushi from ingredients such as “mighty mushrooms” served on a six-grain blend. The lovely organic vegan Japanese restaurant Shojin in Los Angeles is also worth a visit, for dishes like Apricot-Kale Salad with Soy Vinaigrette and Spicy “Tuna” and Avocado Dynamite Roll.

Several years ago, I silently balked when a friend, the psychic Fahrusha, suggested the informal Korean-inspired vegan restaurant Franchia for our lunch date—but after tasting its spicy mock duck salad and vegetable bibimbap, I became a regular customer years before I stopped eating meat in 2012. It’s the sister restaurant of the acclaimed, more formal Hangawi, which strives to achieve the Korean ideal of um and yang (yin and yang in Korean) through a healthy balanced menu of green vegetables and fruits (um) and root vegetables such as radishes, carrots, and potatoes (yang).

I first tasted Malaysian cuisine in Los Angeles in the company of restaurant critic Jonathan Gold. There could have been no better introduction to the delights of coconut milk, galangal, lemongrass-infused curries, and fried noodle dishes. Malaysian cuisine is based on three different cuisines: Chinese, Indian, and Malay, with more meatless options among menus influenced by the first two than the last. Manhattan has its own Michelin-starred Malaysian-influenced restaurant, Laut, near Union Square, which delights with vegetarian takes on classics such as masak kicap (seasoned with cinnamon, garlic, ginger, onions, shallots, star anise, and turmeric), Malaysian vegetable curries, and a banana-and-homemade-peanut-butter roti dessert it calls “the Elvis.”

I’ve been a fan of Manhattan’s oldest Mexican restaurant, El Parador Café, for two decades of its fifty-five years in business. (How can you not love a restaurant whose motto is “The answer is yes. What’s your question?”) And I discovered a year or two ago that it offers vegetarian salsa upon request (its standard warm salsa is not), along with an excellent vegetarian menu—and owner Alex Alejandro will substitute mushrooms in the restaurant’s chilaquiles to make the dish veg. After two decades of loving one of America’s most renowned Mexican restaurants—Chicago’s Frontera Grill—and later its sister restaurant, Topolobampo, I was surprised to discover that the latter, too, offers a vegetarian menu. It blew me away—especially chef Andres Padilla’s extraordinary chayote dish, the best I’ve ever tasted. The organic vegan Mexican restaurant Gracias Madre on Mission Street in San Francisco is a charmer, with specialties like butternut squash tamales and enchiladas con mole.

Middle Eastern cuisines (e.g., Israeli, Lebanese, Syrian, and Turkish) offer an abundance of vegetarian options, from stuffed grape leaves to countless spreads and grains. The Lebanese-inspired mujadara (green lentils + bulgur + fried onions) sandwich at Kalustyan’s in New York City has a cult following, and I’m definitely among the true believers. I had one of the best falafel sandwiches I’ve ever tasted at New York’s hole-in-the-wall Taïm, which also serves the fried eggplant and hummus sandwich known as sabich. The fast-growing vegetarian chains serving Middle Eastern food, such as Boston’s Clover and New York’s Maoz, attest to its deliciousness.

Southern / Soul food–influenced vegetarian spots win raves from coast to coast. I’ll never forget my disbelief that the macaroni and cheese at Everlasting Life Restaurant & Lounge in Washington, DC, was actually vegan—it’s the best version I’ve ever tasted. Then again, I’ve not yet tried the wildly popular original version of Mac and Yease (which features nutritional yeast) created by Plum Bistro’s Makini Howell’s parents at their two-decades-old vegan restaurant Quickie Too in Tacoma, but I can hardly wait.

Thanks to Buddhist beliefs, which influence an estimated 10 to 15 percent of the country to practice vegetarianism, Taiwanese restaurants typically offer many vegetarian options, often without garlic, leeks, and onions (reflecting Buddhist teachings against eating overstimulating foods). These include a variety of mock meats (such as ham, ribs, sausages, and seafood) as well as tofu, rice, noodles, and vegetables. Taiwan-born culinary consultant Yuki Chen has brought some of these influences to the pan-Asian vegan cuisine at Manhattan’s Gobo, whose website indicates that she originally developed them as “the mastermind behind the menu at Zen Palate.”

Restaurants featuring the cuisine of countries where Buddhism has significant numbers of followers are often vegetarian-friendly, with Thai restaurants a prime example. While it’s relatively easy to avoid most meat and dairy by sticking with vegetable curries or tofu pad thai, it’s sometimes a challenge to avoid the ubiquitous fish sauce seasoning—although naturally fermented Golden Mountain Seasoning Sauce, Thai (aka white) soy sauce, or fermented black bean sauce can be substituted.

Vietnamese restaurants often have vegetarian options, although you just as often have to watch out for the seemingly ever-present nuac cham (fish sauce) that flavors them. Manhattan’s Lan Cafe is 100 percent vegetarian, serving dishes such as the Vietnamese baguette sandwiches known as bánh mì, lemongrass seitan on rice vermicelli, and of course pho: Vietnamese noodle soup served here with mock beef and sprouts and seasoned with herbs and lime.

Other cuisines are certainly less veg-friendly by tradition. Given that French cuisine has long incorporated meat stocks and demi-glace as foundational ingredients, I was all the more impressed with the debut of Manhattan’s first French-inspired vegetarian restaurant, Table Verte, where Chef Ken Larsen served dishes such as vegan onion tarts (made with Earth Balance), plus a meatless cassoulet based on black and pinto beans, garlic, and shallots and seasoned with bay leaf, cardamom, chili powder, cumin, and thyme.





GASTRONOMY: SETTING A HIGHER BAR FOR HAUTE CUISINE


“The natural progression of my thinking over thirty years as a chef.”

—ALAIN PASSARD OF THE MICHELIN THREE-STAR RESTAURANT L’ARPÈGE, ON HIS 2001 DECISION TO FOCUS ON A TASTING OF VEGETABLES—“THE GRANDS CRUS DU POTAGER”—AS HIS SIGNATURE MENU




“When you take a custard into the savory realm, it’s much more versatile, happily taking on any number of flavor profiles.… As oils can be infused with herbs, so, too, can custards: a basil custard in tomato soup, for instance; a tarragon custard with diced orange as a refreshing opening course. Some of the cream in the custard can be replaced by a vegetable juice to lighten it and intensify the flavor.”

—THOMAS KELLER, IN HIS BOOK BOUCHON (2004)




“I never, ever eat anything for health reasons. I eat for taste,” says Rene Redzepi… [of] Noma, otherwise known as the best restaurant in the world.… [H]e offered to help with my remedial education. Beginning with this: The reason we should eat our vegetables isn’t because they’re better for us. We should be plucking and pan roasting our friends in the plant kingdom, first and foremost, because they are damned delicious.”

—ADAM SACHS, BON APPÉTIT (DECEMBER 2012)



Gastronomy has been described by philosopher Jean-Anthelme Brillat-Savarin as “the rational study of all related to man as he is eating; its purpose is to keep humankind alive with the best possible food.” It all comes down to two things: the ingredients themselves and the techniques with which they are prepared.

The variety and quality of ingredients available in the United States took a giant leap forward after Alice Waters opened the doors of Chez Panisse in 1971 and then decided that she wasn’t going to settle for sub-par ingredients. In rejecting industrialized food, she launched a revolution—and a new food economy—by developing direct relationships with farmers and other suppliers. Recent decades have seen the rise of specialty producers such as the Chef’s Garden in Ohio and Chino Farms in California and the explosive growth of farmers markets and community-supported agriculture (CSA). Vegetables are clearly eclipsing meat as the new stars of the plate and palate.

Diane Forley, whose 2002 book The Anatomy of a Dish chronicled her botanical approach to cooking and delineated the family trees of various vegetables (a theme later taken up in Deborah Madison’s 2013 Vegetable Literacy), observes how many vegetables thought to be odd twenty years ago are considered commonplace today. “Lots of nutritious plants are starting to be popular, like purslane, nettles, miner’s lettuce, and things previously thought of as ‘weeds,’ ” she observes. “And root vegetables like parsley root and kohlrabi are just not considered unusual anymore.”

Long-time chef of the vegetarian Greens Restaurant in San Francisco Annie Somerville has noted, “When most people don’t like a vegetable, it’s typically for one of three reasons: It’s overcooked, it’s undercooked, or it’s under-seasoned.” Over the years, chefs have learned how to cook and season vegetables for maximum flavor, drawing on the principles of flavor compatibility and leveraging classic flavor pairings while forging new ones.





AARON WOO OF PORTLAND’S NATURAL SELECTION ON CREATING DEPTH OF FLAVOR


“The challenge in vegetable-based cooking is finding depth of flavor. I don’t ever want people to get bored eating one of our dishes. We attack things in regard to texture, because that is the single primary way to get bored: having everything the same texture, regardless of how flavorful it is. Then we use all of our techniques to give each vegetable a different profile.

“Today, we have a lot more going for us than we did ten years ago; we dehydrate, roast, sauté, or char. When charring vegetables, such as ramps or fennel, we roast them at 300 to 400 degrees in the oven for however long is appropriate, and it slowly changes the flavor profile. Then we puree them to create ash to use as a seasoning.

“By focusing on cooking vegetables, I think more about flavor than I ever have before in my cooking career, and I feel I am by far a better cook than I have ever been before in my life.”





Chefs like the late Charlie Trotter brought a new level of respect to vegetables, applying painstaking techniques previously reserved for animal-based ingredients and featuring them on the country’s first vegetarian tasting menus. “Alice Waters may have discovered vegetables, but [Charlie] Trotter was the first man I know who cooked them beautifully,” said Alan Richman in the March 29, 2011, New York Times. After Copenhagen’s Noma was named the world’s best restaurant in 2010, chef René Redzepi was lauded in Bon Appétit for “treating vegetables like meat: braising them, basting them, flavoring them with lots of herbs and butter (preferably that made from sweet, rich goat’s milk).”

Vegetarian cooks have long used blenders (such as immersion blenders and Vitamixes), dehydrators, juicers, smokers, and spiralizers. And after a decade of intense culinary experimentation inspired by Chef Ferran Adrià of Spain’s El Bulli restaurant (creating foams, gels, and caviar-like spheres), there is a new arsenal of culinary techniques being developed and employed to enhance flavor.

M.A.K.E.’s Matthew Kenney builds his dishes around vegetables but takes pains to explain, “It is not simply a pile of carrots. It will be carrots cooked sous-vide until tender, while others are raw and still others pickled. A dish will feature a wide variety of variations on an ingredient, with the foundation being fresh ingredients and any sauces simply enhancements.”

Tal Ronnen of Crossroads restaurant in Los Angeles conducts master vegetarian workshops at Le Cordon Bleu, which shared his vegan adaptations of the five classic mother sauces of French cuisine (béchamel, espagnole, hollandaise, tomato, and velouté). “It was an elective for students and required for the whole staff on all nineteen campuses,” he recalls. “It was great because this is influencing literally hundreds of future chefs who would never have looked at vegan cuisine seriously. By the time the course was over, they saw vegan cuisine in a different light.”

As one the country’s most gifted vegan chefs, Ronnen is already elevating the vegan restaurant experience to a level never seen before. And as more of the world’s best restaurant chefs turn their own attention, talent, and creativity to vegetarian and even vegan menus, he and they are starting to demonstrate the true potential of plant-based cuisine.





FLAVOR: EXPLORING THE FLAVOR EQUATION


“Flavor profiles are really in the herbs or the vegetables, not the protein. That is what determines the character of the dish.”

—TOM COLICCHIO, TO STEPHANIE MARCH OF HAMPTONS MAGAZINE (NOVEMBER 2012)




“[When creating new dishes], I will choose an ingredient to focus on, and that is where The Flavor Bible comes in—I look for [a pairing] that is out of the ordinary, then I’ll come up with the other components that I want to use. Next, I’ll sit down with my sous chef and work it out in a collaborative, organic, and democratic process. I might come up with two parts [of a dish], hit a roadblock, and then talk to someone and open The Flavor Bible. Usually it is a matter of hitting on a single ingredient that will spark the dish into a different direction and make it all come together.”

—JON DUBOIS, GREEN ZEBRA (CHICAGO)





VEGETARIAN SHOW-STOPPER DISH AT BETONY


One of my favorite dishes of 2013 was Eleven Madison Park alum Bryce Shuman’s grain salad at New York City’s Betony, which won a three-star rave from Pete Wells of the New York Times shortly after opening. It’s deceivingly simple-looking: a smear of thick Greek yogurt on a plate, topped with mixed grains, which are in turn topped with a variety of sprouts. Knowing by its extraordinary flavor that there was a lot more to it, I had to ask Bryce to tell me about the secrets behind it.

That yogurt? It’s been pressed and strained until very thick, in order to anchor the grains on the plate. Those grains? They’re a combination of barley, bulgur, farro, quinoa, spelt, and wheat berries. Each is cooked separately—the bulgur and quinoa steamed, and the barley, farro, spelt, and wheat berries simmered. The grains are mixed, and half are dehydrated. The dehydrated grains are submerged (via a strainer) in very hot (450–470 degree) oil for literally one second, so that they puff—creating a crunchy texture. Finely chopped shallots and chives are added to the unpuffed mixed grains, which are seasoned with kosher salt and drizzled with lemon vinaigrette. The grains are then tossed with the puffed grains and placed on the yogurt base. Then they are draped with a combination of mostly clover sprouts, some pea sprouts, and a few mung bean sprouts, and finished with another drizzle of lemon vinaigrette.





Flavor stands at the center of the intersection of these trends, uniting them all. No matter what other factors come into play, it is a love of flavor that is leading chefs to explore new, meatless avenues of flavor enhancement. There’s an aspect of flavor that is intensely personal—and a reflection of one’s experiences, preferences, and values.





FLAVOR = TASTE + MOUTHFEEL + AROMA + “THE X FACTOR”


Taste = What we perceive via the taste buds

Mouthfeel = What we perceive via the rest of the mouth

Aroma = What we perceive via the nose

“The X Factor” = What we perceive via the other senses—plus the heart, mind, and spirit



Understanding flavor is just as important to vegetarian and vegan cooking as it is to any other style of cooking. The first chapter of The Flavor Bible (2008) outlines the basic principles of flavor. I am happy to recap these basics here and to expand upon them for the purposes of contemporary vegetarian cuisine.



Our taste buds perceive five basic tastes: sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami. The essence of good cooking is to bring these five tastes into balanced harmony to create deliciousness. It’s that simple—and that difficult. After all, flavor is a function of our other senses—that is, not only taste, but also smell, touch, sight, and hearing. And because we’re human beings, other nonphysical factors come into play, including our emotions, thoughts, and spirits.

Learning to recognize as well as manipulate both the obvious and subtle components of flavor will make you a much better cook. This book will be your companion in the kitchen whenever you wish to use plant-based ingredients to create deliciousness.

Everyone who cooks—or even merely seasons their food at the table before eating—can benefit from mastering the basic principles of making food taste great. This complex subject is simplified by one fact: while the universe may contain a vast number of ingredients and a virtually infinite number of ingredient combinations, the palate can register only the five basic tastes.

Great food balances these tastes beautifully. A great cook knows how to taste, to discern what is needed, and to make adjustments. Once you learn how to season and how to balance tastes, a whole new world opens up to you in cooking. Great cooking is never as simple as merely following a recipe. The best cooking requires a discerning palate to know when a dish needs a little something or other—and what to add or do to elevate the flavor.





WHAT WE PERCEIVE VIA THE MOUTH





TASTE


Sweet. Salty. Sour. Bitter. Umami. Every delicious bite you’ve ever tasted has been a result of these five tastes coming together on your taste buds. We taste them as individual notes and in concert. Each taste affects the other. For example, bitterness suppresses sweetness. In addition, different tastes affect us in different ways. Saltiness stimulates the appetite, while sweetness satiates it. Take the time to explore the five basic tastes, and you’ll find that they’re often influenced by factors such as freshness and ripeness, which are also helping to fuel the trend toward local cuisine.


Sweetness It takes the greatest quantity of a substance that is sweet (versus salty, sour, bitter, or umami) to register on our taste buds. However, we can appreciate the balance and “roundness” that even otherwise imperceptible sweetness adds to savory dishes. Sweetness can work with bitterness, sourness—even saltiness. Whether delivered via honey, maple syrup, molasses, sugar, or another ingredient, sweetness can also bring out the flavors of other foods, such as fruits and certain vegetables (e.g., tomatoes) and grains (e.g., oats).


Saltiness When (for our 1996 book, Culinary Artistry) Andrew and I banished more than thirty of America’s leading chefs to their own desert islands with only ten ingredients to cook with for the rest of their lives, the number-one ingredient they chose was salt. Salt is nature’s flavor enhancer. It is the single most important taste for making savory food delicious. (Sweetness, by the way, plays the same role in desserts). Salts flavored with smoke or truffles offer even more ways to enhance the flavor of soups or risottos, and New York City’s venerable spice store Kalustyan’s lists dozens of varieties on its website. Beyond salt, regionally appropriate salty ingredients also play an important role in enhancing veg meals, such as Parmesan cheese with dishes like pastas, pizzas, and risottos, and soy sauce and tamari with stir-fries and veg sushi.


Sourness Sourness is second only to salt in savory food and sweeteners in sweet food in its importance as a flavor enhancer. Sour notes—whether a squeeze of lemon or lime, or a drizzle of vinegar—add sparkle and brightness to a dish. Honing your choices for adding acidity, such as by selecting the right vinegar (whether apple cider vinegar for fruit salad, rice wine vinegar for nori rolls, or sherry vinegar for gazpacho) can enhance it even further. Balancing a dish’s acidity with its other tastes is critical to the dish’s ultimate success.


Bitterness Humans are most sensitive to bitterness, and our survival wiring allows us to recognize it in even relatively tiny amounts. Bitterness balances sweetness and can also play a vital role in cutting richness in a dish. For example, the bitterness of walnuts balances the sweetness of a beet salad while cutting the richness of the goat cheese that often accompanies it. Chocolate’s bitterness is an innate counterbalance in rich desserts. While bitterness is more important to certain people than to others, some chefs see it as an indispensible “cleansing” taste—one that makes you want to take the next bite, and the next.


Umami (Savoriness) In addition to the four original tastes, there is now widespread acceptance of a fifth taste, umami, which Andrew and I first wrote about in 1996 in Culinary Artistry. It is often described as the savory or meaty “mouth-filling” taste that is noticeable in such ingredients as aged cheese (e.g., blue, Parmesan), fermented foods (e.g., miso, sauerkraut), mushrooms, and sea vegetables, and in such flavorings as monosodium glutamate (MSG), which is the primary component of branded seasonings such as Acćent. Vegetarian dishes loaded with umami range from miso soup with shiitakes, tofu, and wakame to pastas with tomato sauce, mushrooms, and Parmesan cheese.





MOUTHFEEL


In addition to its sense of taste, the mouth has a sense of “touch” and can register other sensations, such as temperature and texture, that play a role in flavor. These aspects of food, generally characterized as mouthfeel, help to bring food into alignment with our bodies, and bring some of a dish’s greatest interest and pleasure. The crunchiness and crispiness of a dish contribute sound as well as textural appeal.


Temperature Temperature is one of the foremost among the other sensations that can be perceived by the mouth. The temperature of our food even affects our perception of its taste; for example, coldness suppresses sweetness. A food’s temperature can affect both the perception and enjoyment of a dish. A chilled carrot soup on a hot summer day—and hot roasted carrots on a cold winter day—could be said to be “healing” through their ability to bring our bodies into greater alignment with our environment.


Texture A food’s texture is central to its ability to captivate and please. We value pureed and/or creamy foods (such as soup and mashed potatoes) as “comfort” foods, and crunchy and crispy foods (such as nachos and caramel corn) as “fun” foods. We enjoy texture as it activates our other senses, including touch, sight, and sound.



While babies by necessity eat soft or pureed foods, most adults enjoy a variety of textures, particularly crispiness and crunchiness, which break up the smoothness of texture—or even the simple monotony—of dishes. At New York City’s Kajitsu restaurant, Chef Ryota Ueshima often incorporates a crispy tempura-fried element into his silky ramen or udon noodle dishes for a pleasing contrast in texture and flavor.

Much of the flavor of meat is conveyed by its texture, such as its chewiness (e.g., chicken) or its crispiness (e.g., crisp-fried bacon). It’s possible to approximate a similar texture with meatless ingredients (e.g., fried Provolone slices can approximate crispy bacon in a “vegetarian BLT”) or plant-based ingredients (e.g., lentils, whole grains, mushrooms, or frozen-then-cooked and crumbled tofu can approximate chewy ground beef, such as in tacos or chili, while thinly sliced crisp-fried tempeh can approximate bacon, e.g., in a club sandwich). In playful cuisine, caviar can be approximated via spherification, a chemical process introduced by Ferran Adrià at Spain’s El Bulli restaurant in 2003, which involves the creation of spherical caviar-like substances from calcium lactate mixed with sodium alginate and one’s choice of flavorings, from sea vegetables to watermelon.

Likewise, many people enjoy the creamy texture of milk and cream. These can be approximated by plant-based milks, such as those made from almonds, coconut, hazelnuts, hemp, oat, rice, and soy, or by plant-based creams such as cashew cream and coconut cream. If you haven’t yet tried some of the better vegan “ice creams” available, you’re in for a treat: you’ll be amazed by the silky, creamy texture of FoMu’s or Maddy’s ice creams or the commercially available Coconut Bliss nondairy frozen dessert.

For other examples of non-veg foods that can be approximated by vegetarian or vegan substitutes, check out “Getting to the Root of Cravings” on here.


Piquancy Our mouths can also sense what we often incorrectly refer to as “hotness,” meaning piquancy’s “sharpness” and/or “spiciness”—whether boldly as in chile peppers, or more subtly as in a sprinkle of cayenne pepper. Some people find the experience of these picante (as the Spanish say, or piccante as the Italians do) tastes more pleasurable than others, and have varying levels of toleration—hence the “mild,” “medium,” “hot,” or “very hot” labels on many salsas. Mexican cuisine most famously celebrates chiles’ piquancy, although other cuisines—from Thai to Italian (in which you’ll commonly find garlicky broccoli rabe accented with a shake of chili pepper flakes)—do, too.


Astringency Our mouths pucker to register astringency. This is a drying sensation caused by the tannins in red wine or strong tea and occasionally in foods such as walnuts, cranberries, and unripe persimmons. The astringency of cranberries is often a welcome addition to sweeter apple and pear desserts such as pies or crisps, while a handful of astringent pomegranate seeds can add a refreshing counterbalance when sprinkled atop rich Mexican moles or Persian walnut sauces.





WHAT WE PERCEIVE VIA THE NOSE





AROMA


Aroma is thought to be responsible for 80 percent or more of flavor. This helps to explain the popularity of aromatic ingredients, from fresh herbs and spices to grated lemon zest. Incorporating aromatic ingredients can enhance the aroma of your dish and, in turn, its flavor.

While there are only five basic tastes, there is an almost infinite number of aromatic notes that contribute to the flavor of food. Most aromas can be characterized as either sweet or savory.

Sweet notes are largely associated with sweeteners, fruits, and certain vegetables (e.g., sweet potatoes), herbs (e.g., basil), and spices (e.g., cinnamon). Savory notes are typically associated with “meatiness” almost as much as with alliums such as garlic and onions, even across different cultures. Other savory notes can include cheesiness, smokiness, and spiciness. Cheesiness can even be found in vegan cuisine, such as in nutritional yeast, or in vegan cheeses. Smokiness can be imparted via cooking techniques (e.g., grilling, hot or cold smoking) and/or ingredients (e.g., smoked paprika, liquid smoke). And spiciness can reflect flavor chords that are regionally specific combinations of flavors (e.g., garlic + ginger + soy sauce = Asia; garlic + lemon + oregano = Mediterranean).

Some qualities are perceived through both taste and smell:


Pungency Pungency refers to the taste and aroma of ingredients, such as horseradish and mustard, that are as irritating—albeit often pleasantly—to the nose as they are to the palate. The simple sweetness of a beet soup can be punched up with a dollop of horseradish cream sauce, while bitter green salads often find mustard vinaigrettes a welcome enhancement.


Chemesthesis Chemesthesis refers to other sensations that tickle (e.g., the tingle of carbonated beverages) or play tricks on (e.g., the false perception of “heat” from chile peppers or “cold” from spearmint) our gustatory senses. Experimental chefs have had fun introducing sugar combined with carbon dioxide (commercially known as Pop Rocks) into high-end desserts, providing mini-explosions of flavor in the mouth.





WHAT WE PERCEIVE VIA THE OTHER SENSES, THE HEART, THE MIND, AND THE SPIRIT


“THE X FACTOR”


When we are conscious of and alert to what we are eating, food has the power to affect our entire selves. We experience food not only through our physical senses—including our sense of sight, which we address below—but also emotionally, mentally, and even spiritually.

The X Factor takes into consideration the fact that different people will perceive the same dish differently. For example, someone who grew up loving strawberries and someone who is allergic to strawberries will perceive the flavor of the same hypothetical “perfectly prepared” strawberry tart differently. Likewise, an omnivore and a vegetarian will perceive the aroma or flavor of the same hypothetical “perfectly prepared” meat stew differently.

When vegetarians or vegans say that they have “lost their taste for meat,” they don’t actually mean that their taste buds have changed, but that—physically, emotionally, mentally, and/or spiritually—they perceive its flavor as no longer palatable.





THE VISUAL


The visual presentation of a dish can greatly enhance the pleasure we derive from it. During the best vegan tasting menu of my life at Eleven Madison Park, I was as delighted by the visual presentation of the carrot tartare, which was ground before my eyes in a meat grinder temporarily attached to our table for this purpose, and accompanied with a palette of spices and herbs we could use to season it ourselves, as I was with its exquisite resulting flavor.



Just a few decades ago, it was still possible to taste a dish with the eyes, but only those who’d spent time in world-class kitchens knew the tricks of such artistic plate presentation or modern techniques. Since the widespread dissemination of photos of dishes from the world’s best restaurants via the Web, it’s become easier to reproduce a great dish’s elaborate form than its exquisite flavor.

How a dish looks can also affect our perception of its flavor in more direct ways; for example, the deeper the color of a berry sorbet, the more berry flavor is perceived. The stronger the connection between a particular food and a particular color, the stronger the flavor impact—such as raspberries and strawberries with red, lemon with yellow, and lime with green.





THE EMOTIONAL


“I say all the time that [my mother’s Spanish potato and egg tortilla] is my favorite because it conveys a point: that sentimental value comes above all else.”

—FERRAN ADRIÀ, FOUNDING CHEF OF EL BULLI (SPAIN)



We taste with our hearts as much as with our tongues. What else could explain adult preferences for one’s mother’s dishes over those prepared by a great chef? This also helps to explain the lasting appeal of traditional dishes and cuisines of countries around the globe, which stem from our love for their people, their cultures, and the deeply rooted culinary traditions that have sustained them over centuries.

I am in awe of the pivotal moment in the animated film Ratatouille, which is the single best on-screen depiction of the transformative power of food I’ve ever seen. Knowing that chef Thomas Keller had consulted on the design of the movie’s namesake dish, I found the flavor of the extraordinary ratatouille I was served during my veg tasting menu at Per Se in New York City all the more pleasurable.





THE MENTAL


If we ate only for sustenance, we might be able to survive on nutritive pills and water. But we also eat for pleasure. Because we typically eat three times a day, 365 days a year, we enjoy novelty, such as a twist on the traditional construct of a dish. Increasingly, since the 1980s and the advent of “tall” food, chefs have played with the presentation of their ingredients. Since the 1990s, the advent of avant-garde cuisine and so-called molecular gastronomy has seen chefs experiment more and more with both the chemical composition and presentation of dishes as well.

Conceptual dishes provide pleasurable “food for thought.” Chef Amanda Cohen of New York City’s Dirt Candy goes to great lengths, through a development process often lasting months, to reinvent fun vegetable-centric versions of meaty classics, smoking broccoli and nestling it into a hot dog bun to become a “Broccoli Dog” and subbing cornflake-crusted cauliflower for the namesake meat in a veg spin on chicken-and-waffles. And the Inn at Little Washington in Virginia, the site of some of the very best meals of my life, is well known for its signature dish “Portobello Mushrooms Pretending to Be a Filet Mignon.”





THE SPIRITUAL


The preparation, cooking, and eating of food is a sacrament. Treating it as such has the potential to elevate the quality of our daily lives as nothing else can. Several of the world’s leading chefs have worked to perfect each aspect of the dining encounter—from the food and drink to the ambiance to the service—to raise the overall experience to a new level imbued not only with pleasure, comfort, and interest, but also with meaning.





DR. NEAL BARNARD ON THE X FACTOR UNDERLYING CHEESE ADDICTION


“Part of some people’s addiction to cheese is physical. Back in 2003, the NIH [National Institutes of Health] funded us to do a diabetes study using a vegan diet. As the [diabetic] participants began to go vegan, they started losing weight, their blood sugars came down, and everything got better. But I noticed that a lot of them had what I might call food addictions. Some would specifically say, ‘I miss cheese.’ Not necessarily milk, and maybe not even ice cream, but cheese in particular. So I thought, ‘Why is that? It smells like old socks—why cheese?’

“There are a couple of things going on here. First, it turns out that there is a gene that causes some people to be born with too few dopamine receptors in their brains. If you have that DRD2 Taq1 allele, you have fewer dopamine receptors, and that means you don’t feel dopamine’s effects so much—so you need extra dopamine stimulation. So you might smoke, or drink, or get into compulsive gambling or compulsive eating. About half the people with type 2 diabetes have this gene that causes them to overeat—and it leads them to really want things that give them extra dopamine, particularly food.

“But cheese is a special case. Nutritionally, it is awful—with a very high content of saturated fat, cholesterol, and sodium. However, cheese is extremely high in casein, the dairy protein, which is not like other proteins. It breaks apart to release opiates into the bloodstream, and these mild casomorphins attach to the same opiate receptors in the brain that heroin attaches to, called the mu-receptor. So it’s not just taste, it’s not just mouthfeel—dairy products are unique in that they release casomorphins, and cheese has a much higher concentration of them than milk or ice cream.

“If I stuck a needle in your arm a half-hour after you ate cheese, there would be opiates in your bloodstream and attaching to your brain. While it’s not enough to make you drive dangerously or rob a convenience store, it’s enough to make you say the next day, ‘I think I’d like a little more cheese.’ Completely stinky, repugnant cheeses become attractive when a person associates what’s going on in the brain with the smell and the flavor.

“If you are hooked on cheese—or anything else—you might consider trying to make a clean break. That’s easier than teasing yourself with little bits here and there.”





TOWARD A MORE COMPASSIONATE CUISINE


“Will three or four meals [at Matthew Kenney’s Santa Monica raw foods restaurant, M.A.K.E.] be enough to sway a hardened raw-foods cynic? Of course not.… But it may be enough to make him take a second look.”

—PULITZER PRIZE–WINNING RESTAURANT CRITIC JONATHAN GOLD, WRITING IN THE LOS ANGELES TIMES (APRIL 13, 2013)




“This is a chance for a personal revolution: to leave your mark on this planet by causing the least amount of harm possible. What’s the argument for not causing the least amount of harm? Inconvenience? Indifference? Apathy?… Here’s the coolest thing about being vegan in this day and age: It’s never been easier. You can have the same smell, taste, and texture of meat, cheese, and milk without it. Nobody has to suffer and die for dinner any more, including you.”

—GARY YOUROFSKY, THE VEGAN ACTIVIST WHOSE 2010 TALK AT GEORGIA TECH, TITLED “BEST SPEECH YOU WILL EVER HEAR,” BECAME A YOUTUBE SENSATION



Here at the crossroads of our history and our future, we have choices to make every day with every meal we make and eat. I hope that those choices will be more conscious, informed, and compassionate—for ourselves, for others, and for our planet.

In a recent Technomic poll, two out of three Americans agree that a vegetarian meal can be just as satisfying as a non-vegetarian one. My aim with this book is to help make that fraction even larger. Given the extraordinary talent that is being brought to the realm of plant-based cuisine via vegetarian and vegan menus and restaurants, I have no doubt that fraction will continue to grow.

“José Andrés, Mario Batali, and Tom Colicchio are all preaching that vegetables are the next big thing. They are really helping,” Rich Landau and Kate Jacoby of Vedge in Philadelphia observe. “They are not going vegan, or dressing up in cow suits with ‘Meat is Murder’ signs—they are just out there to say what is true: meat is getting boring, and vegetables are the most interesting food there is to cook. It is an amazing perspective and a great way to look at what is happening on our dining scene.”

It is easier than ever to eat vegetarian and even vegan today—and more are doing so. The easiest places I’ve ever tried to do so are New York City and Los Angeles, where there is an embarrassment of riches. The hardest was a suburb two hours east of Minneapolis, where we had to point out to our waitress at one of the “better” restaurants in town that our guacamole was served brown, and were informed, “It always comes out of the can that color.” But we found a little mom-and-pop southeast Asian restaurant in the same town, where we had wonderful veg dishes, so it just took a bit of perseverance.

I’d have imagined that Omaha (land of Omaha Steaks!) might be one of the very toughest. So I was shocked when I first heard that Brooklyn-based vegan cookbook queen Isa Chandra Moskowitz had moved there and was planning to open a vegan café, which underscored how widespread veg cuisine is becoming even outside major metropolitan areas. My eyes opened wider when VegNews named a dozen small towns notable for their vegan friendliness in 2013 and I saw that they included choices from north to south and from coast to coast, including Asheville, North Carolina; Ashland, Oregon; Athens, Georgia; Boulder, Colorado; Ithaca, New York; Portland, Maine; and Santa Cruz, California.

Tal Ronnen of Crossroads in Los Angeles takes it all in stride. “There is nothing that can surprise me anymore,” he told me. “Because this is not a trend or fad: It is something we are going to have to turn to sustain the future of our world. And I am looking forward to every day as it comes.”





FLAVOR COMPATIBILITY


An essential aspect of great cooking is harnessing compatible flavors—which involves knowing which herbs, spices, and other flavorings best accentuate particular ingredients.

A process of trial and error over centuries resulted in classic cuisines and dishes, some of which feature timeless combinations of beloved flavor pairings—for example, apples with cinnamon, bananas with rum, rice with soy sauce, tomatoes with basil, jícama with lime.

It’s fascinating to find that certain combinations of ingredients can fool us into believing we’re eating something other than what we’re actually eating because of their context. As a child of four or five, I once believed that the slice of pie I was eating with soft, layered sugar-and-cinnamon-scented filling was apple pie—and utterly shocked when I learned it was something called “mock apple pie” made with Ritz crackers standing in for sliced apples! The experience was so profound that it started me thinking about food more deeply at a very young age, and deconstructing what makes a dish that dish.

Mock apple pie isn’t such a far cry from the avant-garde creations of modernist kitchens that turn classic dishes on their heads. Homaro Cantu of Chicago’s moto has made the point that classic flavor combinations are what help make experimental dishes work, because they bring a sense of familiarity and comfort to the unfamiliar and novel. So, too, do they further veg interpretations of classic meat-based dishes, such as veg Reuben sandwiches, a cult dish that appears on countless vegetarian restaurant menus. By the time you put together rye bread, Thousand Island dressing, Swiss cheese, and sauerkraut, the context has the eye so convinced that it is really a Reuben sandwich that the palate is more forgiving to the seasoned seitan, tempeh, or other stand-in for corned beef. Likewise, I was so enamored with the flavor and texture of Dave Anderson’s delicious mock tuna salad sandwich at Maddy’s in Los Angeles—with its chopped celery and Vegenaise served on fresh-baked ciabatta bread—that it was a cinch to get me to buy into the slight resemblance of mashed chickpeas to mashed canned tuna.





GETTING TO THE ROOT OF CRAVINGS


“People don’t really crave bacon—they crave something smoky and crispy. And they don’t really crave fish sauce—they crave that fermented umami flavor you can get from fermented black bean sauce.”

—AMANDA COHEN, DIRT CANDY (NEW YORK CITY)


“People associate a lot of flavor properties with meat that are due to the other umami-rich ingredients in a dish. If you put a heavy braised stew made with caramelized onions and tomato paste and red wine next to the same stew made without meat, you’d find virtually the same umami and richness in both.”

—ERIC TUCKER, MILLENNIUM (SAN FRANCISCO)




“Most people think they want milk, cream, and cheese, when what they’re really craving is creaminess. If you sauté onions to caramelize them and puree them with vegetable stock and red wine, it mimics a creamy texture.”

—JON DUBOIS, GREEN ZEBRA (CHICAGO)




“I am not against soy, but we don’t cook tofu or seitan or reshape something into meat here. Nor do we serve fake cheese. Instead, we will try to give you the satisfaction your memory seeks whether it is texture, caramelization, or fat content. If I want to serve a creamy dish with the texture or voluptuousness that you might normally get from butter or cream, I will use root vegetables like carrots, parsnips, celery, or parsley and confit them. We’ll shave them really thin on the mandoline, then add some fat in the form of olive oil with herbs or citrus, and cook them at 85 degrees for six to eight hours, which breaks down the cell wall structure. I will add that I am not a scientist—I am just a cook—but [this approach] achieves everything you’re looking for.”

—AARON WOO, NATURAL SELECTION (PORTLAND, OREGON)





IF YOU ARE CRAVING…


Craving This?

anchovies (e.g., in Caesar salad dressing)

Try This:

capers



Craving This?

anchovy paste

Try This:

dark miso paste

umeboshi plum paste



Craving This?

bacon

Try This:

crisply fried provolone cheese

liquid smoke

pimenton

portobello mushroom “bacon”

sautéed dulse

smoked paprika

smoked salt

smoked tofu

tempeh “bacon”

toasted sesame oil

tofu, extra-firm—marinated in liquid smoke, maple syrup, nutritional yeast, and soy sauce

Lightlife Smart Bacon (bacon-style meatless protein strips)

Lightlife Fakin’ Bacon Organic Smoky Tempeh Strips



Craving This?

beef

Try This:

Gardein Beefless Tips



Craving This?

beef, ground

Try This:

bulgur, seasoned (e.g., in vegetarian burritos, chili, enchiladas, tacos, etc.)

lentils, seasoned

tempeh, crumbled

Field Roast’s Classic Meatloaf



Craving This?

beef stock

Try This:

dark miso broth

Better Than Bouillon “No Beef” base



Craving This?

Bolognese sauce

Try This:

tomato sauce with Italian-seasoned lentils

tomato sauce with tempeh



Craving This?

burgers

Try This:

veggie burgers



Craving This?

butter, e.g., on grilled or toasted sandwiches

Try This:

olive oil, e.g., on bread

vegan margarine, e.g., Earth Balance



Craving This?

caramel

Try This:

pureed dates + salt + vanilla



Craving This?

caramel corn

Try This:

popcorn drizzled with warm brown rice syrup



Craving This?

cheese

Try This:

cashew or other nut-based “cheese”

soy “cheese”

Daiya and Follow Your Heart vegan “cheeses”



Craving This?

cheese, cream

Try This:

soy “cream cheese”



Craving This?

cheese, e.g., smoked Gouda or mozzarella

Try This:

smoked tofu



Craving This?

cheese, e.g., Parmesan (e.g., in onion soups, pesto-like sauces, even Caesar salads)

Try This:

ground almonds + lemon zest + salt + sesame seeds

miso

Parma brand vegan “Parmesan”



Craving This?

cheese, ricotta

Try This:

ground almond, cashew, or pine nut “ricotta”

half nondairy cream cheese + half firm tofu, mashed together

tofu “ricotta,” made from crumbled tofu



Craving This?

chicken

Try This:

chicken of the woods mushrooms

jackfruit

seitan

Gardein Chik’n Filets or Scallopini, Lightlife Smart Strips: Chick’n Style, May Wah Vegetarian Market’s “chicken,” Trader Joe’s Chicken-less Strips



Craving This?

chicken stock

Try This:

light or sweet miso broth

Better Than Bouillon “No Chicken” base



Craving This?

chili, meat-based

Try This:

chili with quinoa



Craving This?

chocolate

Try This:

cacao nibs



Craving This?

chopped liver

Try This:

walnut-lentil paté



Craving This?

chorizo sausage

Try This:

Melissa’s Soyrizo



Craving This?

cottage cheese

Try This:

soy “cottage cheese”



Craving This?

crabcakes

Try This:

“Cape Cod cakes” made with hijiki seaweed and tofu + Old Bay seasoning, served with vegan tartar sauce

“crabfree cakes” made with grated zucchini + Old Bay seasoning

mock crabcakes made with hearts of palm + breadcrumbs + kelp + lemon + mustard + Old Bay seasoning



Craving This?

crab dip

Try This:

white bean dip + dill + kelp + lemon + Old Bay seasoning



Craving This?

cream

Try This:

cashew cream

coconut milk

soy milk



Craving This?

cream, heavy

Try This:

coconut milk (esp. in baking)



Craving This?

cream, whipped

Try This:

cashew cream



Craving This?

dairy, in general

Try This:

coconut milk

other nondairy milks

nuts and seeds and their milks

silken tofu



Craving This?

egg salad

Try This:

mock version made with extra-firm tofu, vegan mayonnaise, and black salt



Craving This?

eggs, in baked goods

Try This:

applesauce, egg replacer, flax seeds, mashed banana, silken tofu



Craving This?

eggs, in quiches

Try This:

silken or firm tofu



Craving This?

eggs, scrambled

Try This:

tofu “scrambles” (esp. with a pinch of turmeric to turn them yellow)



Craving This?

escargot

Try This:

mushrooms (e.g., cremini, forest) braised in butter + garlic + parsley, and stuffed into pasta shells or plastic novelty “snail” shells and served with sliced French baguette



Craving This?

feta cheese

Try This:

cashew “feta”

soy “feta”



Craving This?

fish sauce

Try This:

fermented black bean sauce

Thai soy sauce (aka white soy sauce)

umeboshi plum paste, thinned with water or dashi



Craving This?

fish stock

Try This:

light or sweet miso broth



Craving This?

gyro

Try This:

substitute fried eggplant slices or Taft Seitan Gyro for meat in a pita; top with lettuce, tomato, and tzatziki sauce



Craving This?

ham

Try This:

smoked paprika (e.g., in soup)

smoked tofu (esp. w/maple syrup + tamari)



Craving This?

hamburgers

Try This:

See “burgers,” above.



Craving This?

mayonnaise

Try This:

vegan “mayonnaise,” e.g., Vegenaise



Craving This?

meat

Try This:

grains

legumes

nuts (e.g., walnuts)

seitan

tempeh

tofu

meat sauce (on pasta) sauce with crumbled tempeh



Craving This?

meat, smoked

Try This:

chipotle chiles with adobo, liquid smoke, smoked cheese, smoked tofu



Craving This?

meatballs

Try This:

“wheatballs” (made from seitan)

Nate’s Meatless Meatballs



Craving This?

“meatiness”

Try This:

chiles (e.g., chipotle—use the adobo sauce from canned chiles), garlic (e.g., roasted), liquid smoke, miso, mushrooms, onions (e.g., roasted), paprika (e.g., smoked), shallots (e.g., roasted), soy sauce



Craving This?

milk

Try This:

nondairy milk, e.g., almond (e.g., Almond Breeze), cashew, hazelnut, hemp, nut, oat, rice, soy



Craving This?

onion soup

Try This:

onion soup with miso instead of beef stock

onion soup with molasses + sherry vinegar instead of beef stock



Craving This?

oysters

Try This:

oyster mushrooms

salsify (which has notes of oysters)



Craving This?

pasta

Try This:

spaghetti squash

zucchini spirals



Craving This?

pepperoni

Try This:

Lightlife Smart Deli Pepperoni



Craving This?

pie crusts

Try This:

pie crusts made with Earth Balance natural shortening



Craving This?

pork

Try This:

chicken of the woods mushrooms

jackfruit

seitan

Field Roast’s Celebration Roast



Craving This?

pork fat

Try This:

toasted sesame oil



Craving This?

pork, pulled

Try This:

jackfruit, seasoned with chili powder and other seasonings



Craving This?

salad dressing (creamy)

Try This:

tahini and tahini-based dressings



Craving This?

salad dressing (nonoily)

Try This:

balsamic vinegar, champagne vinegar, rice wine vinegar, verjus (which are all mild enough to be used without oil)



Craving This?

sausage (e.g., on pizza)

Try This:

crumbled tempeh

Field Roast Italian Grain Meat Sausage



Craving This?

sautéed dishes made with oil

Try This:

sautéed dishes made with stock, vinegar, or wine



Craving This?

seafood

Try This:

simmered dulse



Craving This?

sloppy Joes

Try This:

seasoned lentils on whole-grain bun



Craving This?

soup, cream

Try This:

soup, creamy—made so via adding pureed grains (such as oats or rice, e.g., brown or white); or pureed vegetables (e.g., cauliflower)



Craving This?

sour cream

Try This:

cashew “sour cream” (raw cashews + lemon juice + miso + nutmeg + sea salt + water)

nonfat yogurt, or tofu “sour cream” (e.g., firm silken tofu + lemon juice + salt + umeboshi vinegar, or tofu + cider vinegar + lemon juice + oil + salt, or light miso + lemon juice + tofu)

soy milk + oil, emulsified together

pureed silken tofu + hint of lemon juice

Tofutti non-hydrogenated Better Than Sour Cream



Craving This?

stock, meat

Try This:

stock, mushroom or vegetable; miso broth;

see also “beef stock,” “chicken stock,” “fish stock”



Craving This?

tacos, ground beef

Try This:

tacos filled with seasoned brown lentils



Craving This?

tuna

Try This:

smoked tofu



Craving This?

tuna salad

Try This:

ground cashews with chopped celery

mashed chickpeas with chopped celery and nori

mashed tofu with chopped celery, onion, kelp powder



Craving This?

turkey

Try This:

Tofurky (made from tofu, and stuffed on the inside)

Field Roast’s Celebration Roast



Craving This?

tzatziki sauce, Greek

Try This:

vegan “tzatziki” made with raw cashews + cucumber + garlic + lemon + olive oil, seasonings



Craving This?

yogurt

Try This:

coconut or soy “yogurt”




“I typically don’t like fake anything and believe in cooking from scratch. We didn’t like any of the premade veggie burger patties we tried, and only make our own. But realizing that Buddhists have been making faux meats for ages, we’ve found some to be very good. For example, May Wah Vegetarian Market’s ‘chicken’ has amazing flavor and texture. It’s great broiled, because it gets crispy and has a nice stringy texture, but I probably wouldn’t use it for a cold chicken salad.… And while Tofutti sour cream has a texture that’s a bit stiff, I’ve enjoyed it in soups like borscht or on potato latkes.”

—SELMA MIRIAM, BLOODROOT (BRIDGEPORT, CT)



Note: In the interest of helping omnivores in their shift toward flexitarianism / vegetarianism / veganism, several processed foods are included on the list above. While these can be very useful transitional “crutches,” it seems important to underscore that a subsequent move toward a whole-food diet is even better for optimal health.





HOW RESTAURANT MAGAZINE’S WORLD’S 50 BEST RESTAURANTS (2013) LOCATED IN THE U.S. ACCOMMODATE VEGETARIANS


“Having trained in so many great kitchens [in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including Gotham Bar & Grill and the River Café in New York City, as well as those of Guerard and Passard in France], I can still remember the days when the ‘veg plate’ was whatever you could pull together when someone asked for one, and definitely an afterthought. It is nice to see how it has evolved.”

—DIANE FORLEY, FLOURISH BAKING COMPANY (SCARSDALE, NY), WHOSE CELEBRATED MANHATTAN RESTAURANT, VERBENA, OFFERED AN ELABORATE VEGETARIAN TASTING MENU WITH WINE PAIRINGS IN THE 1990’S

#5) Eleven Madison Park (New York City)—Offers vegetarian tasting menu that can be served vegan upon request



#11) Per Se (New York City)—Offers vegetarian tasting menu that can be served vegan upon request



#14) Alinea (Chicago)—Alinea’s menu states, “Alinea accommodates vegetarian diners without compromise to the quality and originality of the cuisine. Please indicate that you wish to have a vegetarian menu when we call to confirm your ticket purchase.”



#19) Le Bernardin (New York City)—Le Bernardin’s seafood-centric menu offers a single vegetarian option for an appetizer (salad) and entrée (vegetable risotto).



#29) DANIEL (New York City)—Offers vegetarian tasting menu that can be served vegan upon request



#47) The French Laundry (Yountville, California)—Offers vegetarian tasting menu that can be served vegan upon request





VEGETABLE-CENTRIC RESTAURANT MENUS


Vegetables are being elevated to new heights at the most rarified levels of the restaurant world. No longer mere “side dishes,” they are the main event and the stars of their own celebrated tasting menus.

The following menus shine a spotlight on some of the vegetarian and vegan dishes that have been served in some of the world’s best dining rooms.





Picholine


New York, New York

Winter 2014

Vegetarian Tasting Menu


Amuse Varie

Winter Vegetable Salad

Parsnip, Mushrooms à la Grecque, Truffle Vinaigrette

Blue Hubbard Squash Bisque

Chestnuts, Pear Butter, Quatre Épices Meringue

Celery Root-Apple Agnolotti

“Borscht,” Celery Tempura

Potato Crusted Hen Egg

Confit Potato, Frisee, Sauce Gribiche

Grilled King Trumpet Mushroom

Wild Rice Fritter, Red Endive, Vanilla-Cranberry Vinaigrette

Potato “Mille-Feuille”

Carrots, Salsify, Parsley Vinaigrette

Fromage Affinés

Selections from our Cheese Cart

Guanaja Chocolate Marquise

Blood Orange, Nicoise Olives, Fennel-Yuzu Sorbet





Per Se


New York, New York

August 24, 2013

Vegetarian Tasting Menu


White Bean Flan

Black Winter Truffle, Nori “Tempura,” Compressed Scallions and Barrel Aged Tamari

Sweet Corn Sorbet

Poached Huckleberries, Red Radishes and Pea Tendrils

Charred Eggplant “Barbajuan”

Cocktail Artichokes, Armenian Cucumbers, Herb Salad and “Romesco”

Coddled Hen Egg

San Marzano Tomato “Soffritto,” Summer Squash, Toasted Pine Nuts and Rosemary Bialy

“Celeri Farci en Façon Subric”

Haricots Verts, Pearl Onions and “Crème de Morilles”

Caramelized Sunchoke “Agnolotti”

Roasted Scarlet Grapes, Romaine Lettuce Hearts and Smoked Ricotta “Glaçage”

“Burrata” Tart

Heirloom Tomatoes, Castelvetrano Olives, Petite Basil and Armando Manni Extra Virgin Olive Oil

“Gin & Juice”

Vanilla Poached Blackberries, Hendricks Gin “Granite” and Tonic Gelée

“Peach Bellini”

Champagne Gelée and Peaches

Fig Leaf “Glace”

Mirin Gelée and Tiger Striped Figs

Chocolate Caramel

Maralumi Chocolate “Ganache,” “Orange Genoise” and Candied Cocoa Nibs





DANIEL


New York, New York

February 12, 2014

Vegetarian Tasting Menu


Leek and Potato Velouté with Romaine Lettuce

Black Trumpet, Chervil Cream, Cremini Mushroom, Black Garlic

Fricassée of Wild Rice with Cilantro

Young Turnips, Swiss Chard, Pearl Onion

Glazed Celery Root with Caramelized Torpedo Shallot

Sautéed Chanterelle, Pomme Dauphine

Radicchio Tardivo Glazed with Blood Orange

Crosnes Tempura and Castelfranco Salad

Cauliflower Cromesquis with Cubeb Pepper

Potato “Saint-Florentin,” Red Ribbon Sorrel

Sunchoke Ravioli with Sautéed Black Trumpet

Swiss Chard Fricassée, Black Garlic, Vadouvan Sauce

.…

Bitter Brew

Fleur de Sel Chocolate Foam, Puffed Wheat, Abbey Ale Ice Cream

Molasses Poached Pear

Lime-Pain de Gênes, Cranberry Confit, Pear-Gewürztraminer Sorbet

Bergamot Parfait

Citrus Gelée, Honey Sablé Breton, Ginger Emulsion





This was the best vegetarian tasting menu of my life:





The Inn at Little Washington


Washington, Virginia

July 22, 2012

Our Garden of Eatin’ Harvest Menu


Tempura Squash with Asian Dipping Sauce

A Shot of our Heirloom Tomato Soup with Truffled Grilled Cheese Sandwich

Blistered Shishito Peppers with Sea Salt

Beet Fantasia: A Mélange of Our Garden Roasted Beets with Virginia Goat Cheese, Beet Sorbet and Orange Essence

Pappardelle Pasta with a Medley of Virginia Mushrooms and Local Peaches

Sweet Corn Custard Wreathed with a Mélange of Garden Beans, Cauliflower and Truffle Vinaigrette

Our Club Sandwich of Eggplant, Grilled Shiitake Mushrooms and Fried Green Tomato on Charred Onions with Burgundy Butter Sauce

Buttermilk Panna Cotta with Sour Cherry Preserves from our Orchard

Grandmother’s Warm Local Peach Tart with Peach Leaf Ice Cream





This was the best vegan tasting menu of my life:





Eleven Madison Park


New York, New York

August 22, 2013

Vegan Tasting Menu

Almonds: Nuts for Nuts with Smoked Paprika and Pimente d’Espelette

Watermelon: Compressed with Beets and Raspberries

Zucchini: Marinated with Teff Crisp and Lemon, Smoked with Shallot Crumble, Pickles and Zucchini Caviar

Cucumber: Salad with Pickled Mustard Seeds

Wax Beans: Salad with Lettuce

Carrot: Tartare with Baguette and Condiments

Sunflower: Barigoule with Sunchokes and Black Truffle

Eggplant: Roasted with Bulgur Wheat, Licorice, and Greens

Fruit Plate: Seasonal Berries

Chocolate: Soy Milk Egg Cream

Mint: Sorbet with Fernet Branca and Chocolate Ganache

Red Pepper: Cheesecake with Strawberry and Cashew

Pretzel: Chocolate Covered with Sea Salt

Apricot: Sweet Black and White Cookie





VEGETARIAN FLAVOR MATCHMAKING: THE LISTS



“I am obsessed with the relationship between cooking and health. When one goes to the opera, one does not expect to return having gone deaf; one does not expect to go blind as a result of going to the theatre. Why then must one do oneself damage by going out to eat? For people who think this way, there is, on one hand, the cuisine for pleasure—but full of menace—and on the other, the diet—for the redemption of the body. This separation is odious, and we must find the means of reconciling pleasure and health. I dream of a cuisine that no longer does anyone harm.”

—ALAIN SENDERENS, PARIS-BASED MICHELIN THREE-STAR CHEF, AS QUOTED IN MIRIAM KASIN HOSPODAR’S 2001 BOOK HEAVEN’S BANQUET




“Chefs hold the key to health in the twenty-first century. And they will be the ones to change the perception that a plant-based diet has anything to do with lack—because, in truth, it opens up a world of abundance. There’s no need to sacrifice any of the mouthfeel, the richness, or the satisfaction that comes from eating the most delicious food.”

—CHEF CHAD SARNO, CO-AUTHOR WITH KRIS CARR OF THE BESTSELLING BOOK CRAZY SEXY KITCHEN



Chef Chad Sarno healed himself of his childhood asthma within six months of giving up dairy products, and he went on to embrace a plant-based diet. Having co-authored the bestselling cookbook Crazy Sexy Kitchen: 150 Plant-Empowered Recipes to Ignite a Mouthwatering Revolution with Kris Carr and served as lead culinary educator of Whole Foods Market’s healthy eating program, he now leads the Plant-Based Professional Certification Course at Rouxbe.com, which includes the unit “Flavor, Seasoning, and Texture.”

“As an educator and chef, the greatest hurdle that I have witnessed when budding chefs and students dive into the kitchen is the awakening and development of the instinct for flavor balancing, combining, and building,” says Sarno. “I have been telling people for years that The Flavor Bible is one of the greatest resources on the market to help guide this intuitive nature that comes with experience, and it is my own go-to book to get the ideas flowing. I think it should be a cornerstone resource for the modern chef and for every home and professional kitchen.”

Sarno has introduced the book and its flavor-pairing approach to participants in bestselling author Dr. John McDougall’s renowned weekend program when teaching seminars on the use of herbs and spices. “The starting point is typically thinking about seasonal products,” says Sarno. “I then skim the book to refresh my memory about classic combinations or to discover unique combinations I almost didn’t believe would work until I tried them for myself and found them awesome.”

The starting point for your creativity in the kitchen can be anything. As Sarno suggests, it often begins with the seasonal availability of a particular ingredient—such as spring’s first morel mushrooms or the arrival of pomegranates in autumn—or even the desire to cook in a particular way, such as firing up the grill in summer or warming the house with an oven-braised dish in winter. It can begin with a craving for the flavors of a particular country or region: the garlic and herbs of Provence, or the chiles and coconut milk of southeast Asia. Or it can begin with simple curiosity, such as the urge to experiment with a new ingredient or technique.

Recognizing this, I’ve provided a broad range of starting points in the A-to-Z (açai to zucchini blossoms) lists that follow: the seasons (with listings for autumn, spring, summer, and winter); an extensive variety of vegetables, fruits, legumes, grains, nuts, seeds, mushrooms, sea vegetables, and other ingredients; dozens of world cuisines; and a broad array of flavorings and seasonings (from asafoetida to elderflower to toasted pumpkin seed oil), including dozens of different salts, peppers, herbs, spices, oils, and vinegars.

Below each entry, you’ll find a distillation of an ingredient’s essence and summary of its key aspects: its season, flavor, volume, nutritional profile, and more. You’ll also find its most highly recommended cooking techniques and some useful tips to keep in mind when working with it. After all, some ingredients lend themselves to being prepared in a particular manner: While potatoes are versatile enough to be cooked in a number of ways (from baked to fried to mashed), delicate salad greens beg to be served raw, and root vegetables to be roasted or stewed.

When perusing the listings of compatible flavors, readers of The Flavor Bible and What to Drink with What You Eat will recognize the same ranking system used in those books to let you know which pairings are truly stellar. Those ingredients that appear in BOLD CAPS with an asterisk (*) are out-of-this-world, time-honored classics: these “marriages made in heaven” make up the top 1 or 2 percent of pairings. Next you’ll find very highly recommended pairings in BOLD CAPS. Bold, lowercase listings are frequently recommended pairings; and plain-text pairings are recommended pairings. And even when just a single top expert recommends a flavor combination, it’s very high praise indeed.


“If you like a mixture such as broccoli rabe, toasted almonds, and manchego cheese with pasta, chances are it’ll be great on pizza, too.”

—ANNIE SOMERVILLE, CHEF OF SAN FRANCISCO’S GREENS RESTAURANT AND AUTHOR OF EVERYDAY GREENS



For many listings, you’ll also find groups of three or more “Flavor Affinities” (as they are called in The Flavor Bible; they are called “flavor cliques” in Culinary Artistry). These affinities will get you started on complex flavor combinations. In other cases, you’ll find some of America’s most creative chefs’ signature vegetarian dishes, so you can gain inspiration from some of the most celebrated vegetable-loving restaurant kitchens across the country.

Annie Somerville’s quotation gets to the heart of the usefulness of these listings: Once you understand flavors that work well together, you can use them in countless different applications, from pasta or pizza toppings to mix-ins for quiches or salads, or as the basis of soups or stews.

As the starting point for creating a dish can be anything at all, you’ll find a range of categories offering inspiration for any interest, such as specific ingredients (from açai to zucchini blossoms), particular cuisines (with alphabetical listings such as Ethiopian cuisine, French cuisine, Indian cuisine, etc.), the seasons (with alphabetical listings for autumn, spring, summer and winter), and more.

Throughout these pages, you’ll also find sidebars on subjects ranging from harnessing the “meatiness” of mushrooms to making pasta sauces from vegetable purees other than tomato. They’ll help you learn not only the “whats” of combining flavors, but also the “whys” and “hows.”

Keep an eye out for the distinctions being made among ingredients. After all, not even all salty condiments (e.g., salt itself, not to mention Bragg Liquid Aminos, soy sauce, tamari, etc.) are created equal. As you hone your selections, you’ll hone the quality of the flavors you’re able to create.


For years, I have traveled throughout North America, spending thousands of hours interviewing creative chefs and other experts on their most highly recommended flavor combinations. I’ve scoured their memories—along with their restaurant menus, websites, cookbooks, and other favorite books—for insights into building flavors. Their wisdom has been synthesized into the comprehensive, easy-to-use listings that follow. These listings represent a treasure trove of ideas for you to put to work in your own kitchen.

Armed with the extensive information that follows, you’ll learn how to better show off virtually any ingredient or to re-create the flavors of any world cuisine you can think of. From here on out, you’ll have the expert advice of some of America’s most imaginative vegetable-loving chefs at your disposal when you want to spark your own creativity. Whether you’re exploring a new flavor or looking for additional ideas for working with an ingredient you’ve cooked a thousand times, you’ll find helpful tips and a plethora of options here.





MATCHING FLAVORS: KEY


INGREDIENT


Much Higher (nutrient concentration)

Higher

Moderate

Lower

Much Lower



[pro-nun-see-AY-shun]

Season: The ingredient’s general seasonal peak(s) in North America, which may vary by location and climate

Flavor: The ingredient’s primary taste (e.g., bitter, salty, sour, sweet, umami), plus primary flavor notes and a brief description of its texture

Volume: The ingredient’s relative flavor “loudness,” from quiet to loud

What it is: A brief description of less common ingredients (and/or the nutritional category, e.g., grain, legume, vegetable)

What’s healthful about it: Key vitamins, minerals, other nutrients, and/or health benefits

Gluten-free: Whether grains are free of gluten, a protein composite found in wheat and related grains

Nutritional profile: The ingredient’s macronutrient content, i.e., percentage of calories from carbohydrates, fat, or protein, in decreasing order

Calories: Number of calories per stated serving size

Protein: Number of grams of protein per stated serving size

Techniques: Methods commonly used to prepare the ingredient (and their general Timing and/or the recommended Ratio of ingredient to cooking liquid)

Tips: Suggestions for preparing, using, and/or serving the ingredient

Botanical relatives: Plant family of origin, which sometimes inspires ideas for pairing experiments

Possible substitutes: In a pinch, other ingredients that may be substituted for the named ingredient (and vice versa)



Flavors mentioned in regular type are pairings suggested by at least one expert.

Bold marks those recommended by a number of experts.

BOLD CAPITALS mark those very highly recommended by an even greater number of experts.

*BOLD CAPITALS with an asterisk (*) mark “Holy Grail” pairings that are the most highly recommended by the greatest number of experts.

Italics mark either specific dishes or cuisines that make use of that particular ingredient.

“Quotation marks” mark meatless versions of typical meat dishes (e.g., tempeh “bacon”) or dishes made in the style of another dish (e.g., farro “risotto”).





NOTE: Those who prefer not to consume butter, cream, mayonnaise, milk, and yogurt (e.g., vegans) can easily substitute their preferred eggless and nondairy versions of these ingredients.







BLACK-EYED PEAS [aka COWPEAS]

BLUEBERRIES

BOK CHOY (aka CHINESE CABBAGE or PAK CHOI)

BORAGE

BOYSENBERRIES (see also BLACKBERRIES)

BRAGG LIQUID AMINOS

BRAZIL NUTS (see NUTS, BRAZIL)

BRAZILIAN CUISINE

BREAD CRUMBS, WHOLE-GRAIN

BREAD CRUMBS, PANKO

BREAKFAST and BRUNCH

BROCCOLI

BROCCOLI, CHINESE (aka CHINESE KALE or GAI LAN)

BROCCOLI RABE (aka BROCCOLI RAAB or RAPINI)

BROCCOLINI

BROWN RICE (see RICE, BROWN)

BROWN RICE SYRUP (aka RICE MALT SYRUP)

BRUNCH (see BREAKFAST and BRUNCH)

BRUSSELS SPROUTS

BUCKWHEAT (aka BUCKWHEAT GROATS; see also KASHA and NOODLES, SOBA)

BULGUR, WHOLE WHEAT (see also WHEAT, CRACKED and WHEAT BERRIES)

BURDOCK (aka BURDOCK ROOT or GOBO ROOT)

BURMESE CUISINE

BUTTER, CLARIFIED (see also GHEE)

BUTTER

BUTTER, PEANUT (see PEANUTS and PEANUT BUTTER)

BUTTERMILK, LOW-FAT

C


CABBAGE, IN GENERAL, or MIXED CABBAGES

CABBAGE, CHINESE (aka NAPA CABBAGE; see also BOK CHOY)

CABBAGE, GREEN

CABBAGE, NAPA (see CABBAGE, CHINESE)

CABBAGE, RED

CABBAGE, SAVOY

CACAO or CACAO NIBS (see also CHOCOLATE, DARK)

CAJUN CUISINE

CALLALOO (see GREENS, AMARANTH)

CANNELLINI BEANS (see BEANS, CANNELLINI)

CANTALOUPE (see MELON, CANTALOUPE)

CAPERS

CARAMEL

CARAWAY SEEDS

CARDAMOM

CARIBBEAN CUISINES (see also JAMAICAN CUISINE)

CARROTS

CASHEW CREAM (see CREAM, CASHEW)

CASHEWS and CASHEW NUT BUTTER

CAULIFLOWER

CAVIAR, VEGAN

CAVOLO NERO (see KALE, BLACK)

CAYENNE (aka RED PEPPER)

CELERY

CELERY ROOT (aka CELERIAC)

CELERY SALT

CELERY SEEDS

CHARD, e.g., RAINBOW, RED/RUBY, SWISS, or MIXED

CHARD, RED / RUBY (see CHARD)

CHARD, SWISS (see CHARD)

CHAYOTE (aka CHAYOTE SQUASH and MIRLITON; see also SQUASH, SUMMER)

CHEESE, ASIAGO

CHEESE, BLUE (e.g., GORGONZOLA, ROQUEFORT, STILTON)

CHEESE, BRIE

CHEESE, BURRATA

CHEESE, CHEDDAR

CHEESE, CHÈVRE (aka FRESH GOAT CHEESE; see CHEESE, GOAT)

CHEESE, COTIJA (see CHEESE, QUESO AÑEJO)

CHEESE, COTTAGE

CHEESE, CREAM (see also FROMAGE BLANC)

“CHEESE, CREAM”—CASHEW NUT (VEGAN)

“CHEESE, CREAM”—SOY

CHEESE, EMMENTAL (FRENCH) or EMMENTALER (SWISS)

CHEESE, FETA

CHEESE, FONTINA

CHEESE, GOAT

CHEESE, GORGONZOLA (see CHEESE, BLUE)

CHEESE, GOUDA

CHEESE, GRUYÈRE

CHEESE, HALLOUMI

CHEESE, HAVARTI

CHEESE, JACK (aka MONTEREY JACK)

CHEESE, MANCHEGO

CHEESE, MOZZARELLA

CHEESE, PARMESAN

CHEESE, PECORINO

CHEESE, PROVOLONE

CHEESE, QUESO AÑEJO

CHEESE, QUESO FRESCO

CHEESE, RICOTTA

CHEESE, RICOTTA SALATA

CHEESE, ROQUEFORT (see CHEESE, BLUE)

CHEESE, ROMANO

CHEESE, SMOKED MOZZARELLA

CHEESE, STILTON (see CHEESE, BLUE)

CHEESE, SWISS

CHEESE, TALEGGIO

“CHEESE,” VEGAN

CHERRIES, SOUR and SWEET

CHERRIES, DRIED, esp. SOUR

CHERVIL

CHESTNUTS

CHIA SEEDS

CHICKPEAS (aka GARBANZO BEANS)

CHICORIES (see ENDIVE, ESCAROLE, and RADICCHIO)

CHICORY (see also RADICCHIO, aka RED CHICORY)

CHILES—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

CHILES, ANAHEIM

CHILES, ANCHO

CHILES, CASCABEL

CHILES, CHIPOTLE

CHILES, GREEN (see CHILES, JALAPEÑO and CHILES, SERRANO)

CHILES, GUAJILLO

CHILES, HABANERO

CHILES, JALAPEÑO

CHILES, PASILLA

CHILES, POBLANO

CHILES, SERRANO

CHILES, THAI

CHILI PEPPER FLAKES

CHILI POWDER

CHINESE CUISINE

CHINESE FIVE-SPICE POWDER (see FIVE-SPICE POWDER)

CHIVES

CHIVES, GARLIC (aka CHINESE CHIVES)

CHOCOLATE, DARK (see also CACAO and COCOA POWDER)

CHOCOLATE, WHITE

CILANTRO (aka CHINESE PARSLEY or FRESH CORIANDER LEAF)

CINNAMON

CITRUS—IN GENERAL (see GRAPEFRUIT, LEMON, LIME, ORANGE, and TANGERINE)

CLEMENTINES (see MANDARINS, ORANGES, and TANGERINES)

CLOVES

COCOA POWDER (see also CACAO and CHOCOLATE, DARK)

COCONUT, COCONUT CREAM, and COCONUT MILK (see also COCONUT BUTTER, COCONUT NECTAR, COCONUT WATER, and MILK, COCONUT)

COCONUT BUTTER

COCONUT MILK (see COCONUT and MILK, COCONUT)

COCONUT NECTAR

COCONUT WATER

COFFEE / ESPRESSO

CORIANDER

CORN

CORNMEAL and POLENTA (see also GRITS)

CORNSTARCH

COTTAGE CHEESE (see CHEESE, COTTAGE)

COUSCOUS, ISRAELI

COUSCOUS, WHOLE-WHEAT

CRANBERRIES

CRANBERRIES, DRIED

CREAM, HEAVY

“CREAM,” CASHEW

CREAM, WHIPPED—VEGAN

CREAM CHEESE (see CHEESE, CREAM)

CRÈME FRAÎCHE (see also FROMAGE BLANC)

CRESS (see LAND CRESS and WATERCRESS)

CRUCIFEROUS VEGETABLES (see ARUGULA; BOK CHOY; BROCCOLI; BROCCOLINI; BROCCOLI RABE; BRUSSELS SPROUTS; CABBAGE; CAULIFLOWER; GREENS—e.g., COLLARD, MUSTARD, TURNIP; KALE; KOHLRABI; RADISHES; TURNIPS; WATERCRESS)

CUBAN CUISINE

CUCUMBERS

CUMIN

CURRY LEAVES (aka CURRY LEAF)

CURRY PASTE, THAI (e.g., GREEN or RED)

D


DAIKON

DANDELION GREENS (see GREENS, DANDELION)

DASHI (aka KOMBU DASHI) (see also STOCK, VEGETABLE)

DATES

DEHYDRATING

DESSERTS

DILL (see also DILL SEEDS and DILL WEED)

DILL SEEDS (see also DILL and DILL WEED)

DILL WEED (see also DILL and DILL SEEDS)

DULSE (FLAKES)

E


EDAMAME

EGGPLANT (aka AUBERGINE)

EGGPLANT, JAPANESE

EGGS (e.g., FRESH)

EGGS, HARD-BOILED

EGYPTIAN CUISINE

ENDIVE (aka BELGIAN ENDIVE)

ENDIVE, CURLY (see FRISÉE)

EPAZOTE

ESCAROLE

ETHIOPIAN CUISINE

F


FALL (see AUTUMN)

FARRO (aka EMMER WHEAT)

FENNEL

FENNEL FRONDS (or LEAVES)

FENNEL POLLEN

FENNEL SEEDS

FENUGREEK

FIDDLEHEAD FERNS

FIGS (see also FIGS, DRIED)

FIGS, DRIED

FIVE-SPICE POWDER

FLAXSEED OIL (see OIL, FLAXSEED)

FLAXSEEDS

FLOUR, RICE

FLOUR, SPELT

FLOUR, SPROUTED

FLOWERS, EDIBLE

FREEKEH (aka FRIKEH)

FRENCH CUISINE

FRESHNESS

FRISÉE (aka CURLY ENDIVE)

FROMAGE BLANC

FRUITS AND VEGETABLES, FROZEN

FRUITS, DRIED (see APRICOTS, DRIED; CHERRIES, DRIED; CRANBERRIES, DRIED; CURRANTS, DRIED; PLUMS, DRIED; RAISINS, etc.)

G


GALANGAL (see also GINGER)

GARBANZO BEANS (see CHICKPEAS)

GARDEN CRESS (see LAND CRESS)

GARLIC

GARLIC, BLACK

GARLIC, GREEN (aka BABY GARLIC or SPRING GARLIC)

GARLIC SCAPES

GHEE

GINGER—IN GENERAL

GINGER, POWDERED (i.e., dried, ground)

GLUTEN

GLUTEN-FREE

GOJI BERRIES

GRAINS, FAST-COOKING (see COUSCOUS and QUINOA)

[WHOLE] GRAINS AND CEREALS (see also COUSCOUS, WHOLE-WHEAT; POLENTA; QUINOA; RICE, BROWN; WHEAT BERRIES, etc.)

GRAINS OF PARADISE

GRAPEFRUIT

GRAPE LEAVES

GRAPES (and GRAPE JUICE)

GREEK CUISINE (see also MEDITERRANEAN CUISINES)

GREENS—IN GENERAL OR MIXED (see also ARUGULA; BOK CHOY; CABBAGE; CHARD, SWISS; GREENS, BEET; GREENS, BITTER; GREENS, COLLARD; GREENS, DANDELION; GREENS, SALAD; GREENS, TURNIP; KALE; LETTUCE; and SPINACH)

GREENS, AMARANTH (LEAVES/STEMS, aka CALLALOO; see also LAMB’S-QUARTER and SPINACH)

GREENS, ASIAN (see BOK CHOY; BROCCOLI, CHINESE; CABBAGE, NAPA; MIZUNA, and TATSOI)

GREENS, BEET

GREENS, BITTER (see GREENS, BEET; GREENS, COLLARD; GREENS, DANDELION; GREENS, MUSTARD; KALE, etc.)

GREENS, COLLARD

GREENS, DANDELION

GREENS, LEAFY (see GREENS, BITTER; and GREENS, SALAD)

GREENS, MIZUNA

GREENS, MUSTARD

GREENS, SALAD—IN GENERAL AND MIXED (e.g., MESCLUN) (see also ARUGULA, ENDIVE, ESCAROLE, FRISÉE, LETTUCE, MCHE, MIZUNA, RADICCHIO, SALAD DRESSINGS, SPINACH, WATERCRESS, etc.)

GREENS, TURNIP

GRILLING

GRITS

GUAVA, GUAVA JUICE (or NECTAR), and GUAVA PASTE

H


HAZELNUTS (aka FILBERTS)

HERBS, DRIED

HIZIKI (aka HIJIKI)

HOMINY

HONEY—IN GENERAL

HONEY, VEGAN (see also HONEY)

HORSERADISH— PREPARED or FRESH

HUCKLEBERRIES

HUITLACOCHE

I


INDIAN CUISINE

INDONESIAN CUISINE

IRISH MOSS

ISRAELI CUISINE (see also MEDITERRANEAN CUISINES)

ITALIAN CUISINE, NORTHERN

ITALIAN CUISINE, SOUTHERN

J


JACKFRUIT, UNRIPE GREEN

JAGGERY

JAMAICAN CUISINE (see also CARIBBEAN CUISINES)

JAPANESE CUISINE

JÍCAMA

JUICES (see also SMOOTHIES)

JUNIPER BERRIES

K


KAFFIR LIME and KAFFIR LIME LEAVES

KALE

KALE, BLACK (aka CAVOLO NERO, DINOSAUR KALE, LACINATO KALE, or TUSCAN KALE)

KAMUT

KANTEN

KASHA (aka TOASTED BUCKWHEAT GROATS; see also BUCKWHEAT)

KELP, KELP GRANULES, and KELP POWDER (see also ARAME, KOMBU, SEA VEGETABLES, and WAKAME)

KIWI (aka KIWIFRUIT)

KOHLRABI

KOMBU

KOREAN CUISINE

KUMQUAT

KUZU (aka KUDZU ROOT)

L


LAMB’S-QUARTER (aka QUELITE or WILD SPINACH; see also tips for GREENS, AMARANTH; and SPINACH)

LAMB’S LETTUCE (see LETTUCE, LAMB’S)

LAND CRESS (aka GARDEN CRESS; see also WATERCRESS)

LAVENDER

LEEKS

LEGUMES (see also specific BEANS, CHICKPEAS, LENTILS, PEANUTS, PEAS, and SOYBEANS)

LEMONGRASS

LEMONS

LEMONS, MEYER

LEMONS, PRESERVED

LEMON THYME

LEMON VERBENA

LENTILS—IN GENERAL (see also specific LENTILS)

LENTILS, BLACK (aka BELUGA)

LENTILS, BROWN

LENTILS, CHICKPEA

LENTILS, FRENCH

LENTILS, GREEN

LENTILS, RED

LENTILS, YELLOW

LETTUCES—IN GENERAL OR MIXED (see also specific LETTUCES, e.g., LETTUCE, BUTTER; LETTUCE, ROMAINE)

LETTUCE, BIBB (aka LETTUCE, BUTTER; see LETTUCE, BUTTER)

LETTUCE, BOSTON (aka LETTUCE, BUTTER; see LETTUCE, BUTTER)

LETTUCE, BUTTER (aka BIBB or BOSTON LETTUCE)

LETTUCE, LAMB’S (aka CORN SALAD or MCHE)

LETTUCE, ROMAINE

LIMES (e.g., JUICE, ZEST)

LIQUID SMOKE

LOTUS ROOT

LOVAGE

LUNCH and DINNER

LYCHEES

M


MACA, MACA POWDER, or MACA ROOT

MACARONI AND CHEESE

MACE

MCHE (see LETTUCE, LAMB’S)

MAMEY (aka MAMEY APPLE or MAMEY SAPOTE)

MANDARINS (see ORANGES, MANDARIN)

MANGOES

MANGOES, GREEN (see also MANGOES)

MAPLE SYRUP

MARJORAM

MASCARPONE

MATCHA POWDER

MAYONNAISE

MEDITERRANEAN CUISINES (see GREEK CUISINE, ITALIAN CUISINE—SOUTHERN, etc.)

MELON—IN GENERAL, or MIXED (see also MELON, CANTALOUPE; MELON, HONEYDEW; WATERMELON; etc.)

MELON, BITTER

MELON, CANTALOUPE

MELON, HONEYDEW

MELON, WINTER

MESCLUN (see GREENS, MESCLUN)

MEXICAN CUISINE

MIDDLE EASTERN CUISINES

MILK, e.g., WHOLE or NONFAT—IN GENERAL

MILK, ALMOND

MILK, COCONUT

MILK, GOAT

MILK, HEMP

MILK, RICE

MILK, SOY

MILLET

MINT (typically SPEARMINT)

MIRIN

MISO—IN GENERAL (or MIXED MISOS), ORGANIC

MISO, BROWN

MISO, DARK

MISO, LIGHT (aka SWEET MISO)

MISO, RED

MISO, WHITE (see also MISO, LIGHT)

MISO, YELLOW (see also MISO, LIGHT)

MIZUNA (see GREENS, MIZUNA)

MOLASSES

MOROCCAN CUISINE

MUNG BEANS (see BEANS, MUNG)

MUSHROOMS—IN GENERAL

MUSHROOMS, BLACK TRUMPET

MUSHROOMS, BUTTON (aka WHITE MUSHROOMS)

MUSHROOMS, CHANTERELLE

MUSHROOMS, CHICKEN OF THE WOODS

MUSHROOMS, CREMINI (aka CRIMINI or ITALIAN BROWN MUSHROOMS)

MUSHROOMS, ENOKI (aka ENOKITAKE)

MUSHROOMS, HEDGEHOG

MUSHROOMS, HEN OF THE WOODS (aka MAITAKE MUSHROOMS)

MUSHROOMS, LOBSTER

MUSHROOMS, MAITAKE (see MUSHROOMS, HEN OF THE WOODS)

MUSHROOMS, MATSUTAKE

MUSHROOMS, MOREL

MUSHROOMS, OYSTER

MUSHROOMS, POM POM

MUSHROOMS, PORCINI (aka BOLETES or CÈPES; see also MUSHROOMS, WILD)

MUSHROOMS, PORTOBELLO

MUSHROOMS, SHIITAKE—DRIED and FRESH

MUSHROOMS, WHITE (see MUSHROOMS, BUTTON)

MUSHROOMS, WILD—IN GENERAL, or MIXED (see also CHANTERELLE, HEN OF THE WOODS, MOREL, PORCINI, etc.)

MUSTARD, e.g., DIJON (see also GREENS, MUSTARD; MUSTARD POWDER; MUSTARD SEEDS)

MUSTARD POWDER (aka DRY MUSTARD)

MUSTARD SEEDS

N


NAMA-FU (see also recommendations for SEITAN)

NATIVE AMERICAN CUISINE

NECTARINES (see also tips for PEACHES)

NETTLES (aka STINGING NETTLES)

NIGELLA SEEDS

NOODLES, ASIAN (see NOODLES, CELLOPHANE; NOODLES, KELP; NOODLES, RAMEN; NOODLES, RICE; NOODLES, RICE VERMICELLI; NOODLES, SOBA; NOODLES, SOMEN; and NOODLES, UDON)

NOODLES, BEAN THREAD (see NOODLES, CELLOPHANE)

NOODLES, BUCKWHEAT (see NOODLES, SOBA)

NOODLES, CELLOPHANE (aka BEAN THREAD NOODLES, GLASS NOODLES, MUNG BEAN NOODLES)

NOODLES, CHINESE EGG

NOODLES, GLASS (see NOODLES, CELLOPHANE)

NOODLES, GREEN TEA SOBA

NOODLES, KELP

NOODLES, MUNG BEAN (see NOODLES, CELLOPHANE)

NOODLES, RAMEN

NOODLES, RICE (aka RICE STICKS—or RICE VERMICELLI, which are thinner strands)

NOODLES, SHIRATAKI and TOFU SHIRATAKI

NOODLES, SOBA—WHOLE-GRAIN

NOODLES, SOMEN

NOODLES, UDON

NORI (aka LAVER)

NUTMEG

NUTRITIONAL YEAST (aka affectionately as NOOCH)

NUTS (see also ALMONDS, CASHEWS, PEANUTS, WALNUTS, etc.)

NUTS, BRAZIL

NUTS, MACADAMIA

O


OATMEAL and OATS

OIL—IN GENERAL

OIL, ACORN SQUASH SEED

OIL, ALMOND

OIL, ARGAN

OIL, AVOCADO

OIL, CAMELINA SEED

OIL, CANOLA

OIL, CHILI

OIL, COCONUT

OIL, FLAXSEED

OIL, GRAPESEED

OIL, HAZELNUT

OIL, HEMP

OIL, LEMON

OIL, NUT (see OIL, ALMOND; OIL, HAZELNUT; OIL, PISTACHIO; OIL, WALNUT)

OIL, OLIVE

OIL, PEANUT

OIL, PINE NUT

OIL, PISTACHIO

OIL, PUMPKIN SEED

OIL, RAPESEED (see OIL, CANOLA)

OIL, RED PALM

OIL, SAFFLOWER

OIL, SESAME

OIL, SUNFLOWER SEED

OIL, TRUFFLE—IN GENERAL (i.e., BLACK or WHITE)

OIL, TRUFFLE—BLACK

OIL, TRUFFLE—OREGON

OIL, TRUFFLE—WHITE

OIL, VEGETABLE

OIL, WALNUT

OIL SUBSTITUTES

OKRA

OLIVES—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

OLIVES, KALAMATA

OLIVES, MANZANILLA (aka SPANISH OLIVES)

OLIVES, NIÇOISE

OLIVES, PICHOLINE

ONIONS—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

ONIONS, CIPOLLINI

ONIONS, GREEN (see SCALLIONS)

ONIONS, PEARL

ONIONS, RED (see also ONIONS)

ONIONS, SPRING (see also SCALLIONS)

ONIONS, VIDALIA

ORANGES, ORANGE JUICE, and ORANGE ZEST

ORANGES, BLOOD (see also ORANGES)

ORANGES, MANDARIN

OREGANO

OREGANO, MEXICAN

ORGANIC PRODUCE

ORZO (see PASTA, ORZO)

P


PALM, HEARTS OF (aka HEARTS OF PALM)

PALM SHORTENING

PAPAYA (i.e., RED)

PAPAYA, GREEN (UNRIPE)

PAPRIKA (see also PAPRIKA, SMOKED)

PAPRIKA, SMOKED (aka PIMENTON or PIMENTON DE LA VERA)

PAPRIKA, SPANISH (see PAPRIKA, SMOKED)

PARSLEY, generally ITALIAN (aka FLAT-LEAF PARSLEY)

PARSLEY ROOT

PARSNIPS

PASSION FRUIT

PASTA—WHOLE-GRAIN, IN GENERAL

PEACHES

PEANUTS and PEANUT BUTTER

PEARS—IN GENERAL

PEAS (aka ENGLISH PEAS, GARDEN PEAS, or GREEN PEAS; see also BLACK-EYED PEAS and PEAS, SPLIT)

PEAS, SNAP (see SUGAR SNAP PEAS)

PEAS, SNOW (see SNOW PEAS)

PEAS, SPLIT

PEA SHOOTS (see SHOOTS, PEA)

PEAS, SUGAR SNAP (see SUGAR SNAP PEAS)

PECANS

PEPITAS (see SEEDS, PUMPKIN)

PEPPER, BLACK

PEPPER, ESPELETTE

PEPPER, SZECHUAN

PEPPER, WHITE

PEPPERMINT

PEPPER SAUCE (see HOT PEPPER SAUCE)

PEPPERS, BELL (see BELL PEPPERS)

PEPPERS, CHILE (see CHILES)

PEPPERS, PIQUILLO

PEPPERS, SWEET (see BELL PEPPERS—RED and YELLOW)

PERSIMMONS

PHYLLO, WHOLE-WHEAT

PIECRUSTS, VEGAN

PIMENTON (see also PAPRIKA, SMOKED)

PINEAPPLE

PINE NUTS (aka PIGNOLI)

PISTACHIOS

PLANTAINS—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

PLANTAINS, GREEN

PLANTAINS, SWEET (e.g., BROWN or YELLOW)

PLUMS

PLUMS, DRIED (aka PRUNES) and DRIED PLUM PUREE

PLUMS, UMEBOSHI and UMEBOSHI PLUM PASTE (see UMEBOSHI PLUMS)

POLENTA (see CORNMEAL, from which polenta is made)

POMEGRANATE MOLASSES

POMEGRANATES and POMEGRANATE JUICE (see also POMEGRANATE MOLASSES)

POMELO (see recommendations for GRAPEFRUIT)

POPCORN, e.g., air-popped

POPPY SEEDS (see SEEDS, POPPY)

POSOLE (see HOMINY)

POTATOES—IN GENERAL, WITH SKIN

POTATOES, BLUE (or PURPLE)

POTATOES, FINGERLING

POTATOES, HIGH-STARCH (e.g., IDAHO, RUSSET)

POTATOES, LOW-STARCH (e.g., NEW)

POTATOES, NEW (aka RED POTATOES)

POTATOES, RED (see POTATOES, NEW)

POTATOES, RUSSET

POTATOES, SWEET (see SWEET POTATOES)

POTATOES, THICK-SKINNED (e.g., IDAHO, RUSSET)

POTATOES, THIN-SKINNED (e.g., NEW POTATOES, WHITE POTATOES)

POTATOES, WHITE

POTATOES, YELLOW (e.g., YUKON GOLD)

PRESSURE-COOKING

PRUNES and PRUNE PUREE (see PLUMS, DRIED)

PULSES (see also specific BEANS, CHICKPEAS, specific LENTILS; PEAS, SPLIT)

PUMPKIN (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

PUMPKIN SEEDS (see SEEDS, PUMPKIN)

PURSLANE (aka VERDOLAGA)

Q


QUELITES (see LAMB’S-QUARTER)

QUINCES

QUINOA

R


RADICCHIO

RADISHES—IN GENERAL (see also DAIKON)

RADISHES, BLACK

RADISHES, DAIKON (see DAIKON)

RADISHES, WATERMELON

RAISINS

RAMPS

RASPBERRIES

RHUBARB

RICE—IN GENERAL

RICE, ARBORIO (aka RISOTTO)

RICE, BASMATI, and BROWN BASMATI RICE

RICE, BLACK (aka FORBIDDEN RICE)

RICE, BOMBA (see also SPANISH CUISINE)

RICE, BROWN—IN GENERAL

RICE, BROWN—BASMATI (see RICE, BASMATI)

RICE, BROWN—JASMINE (see RICE, JASMINE)

RICE, BROWN—LONG-GRAIN

RICE, BROWN—SHORT-GRAIN

RICE, CARNAROLI (aka RISOTTO; see recommendations for RICE, ARBORIO)

RICE, JASMINE (see also THAI CUISINE)

RICE, LONG-GRAIN (see also RICE, BASMATI and RICE, JASMINE)

RICE, SHORT-GRAIN (see also RICE, ARBORIO and RICE, SUSHI)

RICE, STICKY

RICE, SUSHI

RICE, WILD

RICOTTA (see CHEESE, RICOTTA)

RISOTTO (see recommendations for RICE, ARBORIO)

ROMAINE (see LETTUCE, ROMAINE)

ROOT VEGETABLES—IN GENERAL, or MIXED (see also BEETS, CARROTS, PARSNIPS, RUTABAGAS, SWEET POTATOES, TURNIPS, etc.)

ROSEMARY

RUTABAGAS

RYE BERRIES (aka WHOLE RYE)

S


SAFFRON

SAGE

SALAD DRESSINGS

SALSIFY

SALT—IN GENERAL

SALT, BLACK

SALT, HIMALAYAN

SALT, KOSHER

SALT, SEA

SALT, SMOKED

SALT, TRUFFLE

SALTINESS

SAUERKRAUT

SAVORY

SCALLIONS (aka GREEN ONIONS or SPRING ONIONS)

SCRAMBLES (see TOFU, SCRAMBLED)

SEA BEANS (aka GLASSWORT or SAMPHIRE)

SEA VEGETABLES (see also ARAME, DULSE, HIZIKI, KOMBU, NORI, WAKAME)

SEASONALITY (see AUTUMN, SPRING, SUMMER, WINTER)

SEAWEED (see SEA VEGETABLES, ARAME, DULSE, HIZIKI, KELP, NORI, WAKAME)

SEEDS, CARAWAY (see CARAWAY SEEDS)

SEEDS, CHIA (see CHIA SEEDS)

SEEDS, FLAX (see FLAXSEEDS)

SEEDS, HEMP

SEEDS, POPPY

SEEDS, PUMPKIN

SEEDS, SESAME (see SESAME SEEDS)

SEEDS, SUNFLOWER

SEITAN (see also tips for NAMA-FU)

SESAME OIL (see OIL, SESAME)

SESAME SEEDS—IN GENERAL (aka GOMA)

SHALLOTS

SHISHITO PEPPERS

SHISO LEAF (aka JAPANESE BASIL or PERILLA)

SHOOTS, PEA

SHOOTS, SUNFLOWER

SLOW-COOKED

SMOKING

SMOOTHIES (see also JUICES)

SNACKS

SNAP PEAS (see SUGAR SNAP PEAS)

SNOW PEAS (aka CHINESE PEA PODS) (see also SUGAR SNAP PEAS)

SORGHUM (aka JOWAR and MILO)

SORREL

SOUR CREAM

SOURNESS

SOUTH AMERICAN CUISINE

SOUTHWESTERN (U.S.) CUISINE

SOYBEANS (see also EDAMAME, which are green soybeans)

SOY SAUCE, NATURALLY FERMENTED (see also TAMARI)

SOY SAUCE, THAI (aka LIGHT, THIN, or WHITE SOY SAUCE)

SPANISH CUISINE

SPELT BERRIES

SPINACH

SPRING

SPROUTS—IN GENERAL, or MIXED

SPROUTS, ALFALFA

SPROUTS, BEAN (see SPROUTS, MUNG BEAN)

SPROUTS, BROCCOLI

SPROUTS, BUCKWHEAT

SPROUTS, CHICKPEA

SPROUTS, CLOVER

SPROUTS, DAIKON (see also SPROUTS, RADISH)

SPROUTS, LEAFY (see ALFALFA SPROUTS and CLOVER SPROUTS)

SPROUTS, LENTIL

SPROUTS, MUNG BEAN

SPROUTS, PEA

SPROUTS, RADISH (see also SPROUTS, DAIKON)

SPROUTS, SUNFLOWER SEED

SQUASH (see SQUASH, SUMMER; SQUASH, WINTER; ZUCCHINI, and other specific varieties of squash)

SQUASH, ACORN (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, BUTTERCUP (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, BUTTERNUT (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, CROOKNECK (see also SQUASH, SUMMER)

SQUASH, DELICATA (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, HUBBARD (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, KABOCHA (see also SQUASH, WINTER)

SQUASH, PATTYPAN (see also SQUASH, SUMMER)

SQUASH, SPAGHETTI

SQUASH, SUMMER (see also CHAYOTE; SQUASH, CROOKNECK; SQUASH, PATTY PAN; and ZUCCHINI)

SQUASH, WINTER—IN GENERAL, OR MIXED SQUASHES (see also PUMPKIN; SQUASH, ACORN; SQUASH, BUTTERCUP; SQUASH, BUTTERNUT; SQUASH, DELICATA; SQUASH, HUBBARD; SQUASH, KABOCHA)

SQUASH, YELLOW (see SQUASH, SUMMER)

SRIRACHA (aka CHILI GARLIC SAUCE)

STAR ANISE

STAR FRUIT (aka CARAMBOLA)

STOCK, “BEEF”

STOCK, “CHICKEN”

STOCK, MUSHROOM

STOCK, VEGETABLE (see also DASHI)

STRAWBERRIES

SUCANAT

SUGAR, BROWN—DARK

SUGAR, BROWN—LIGHT

SUGAR, DATE

SUGAR, MAPLE

SUGAR, MUSCOVADO

SUGAR, ORGANIC CANE

SUGAR, PALM

SUGAR SNAP PEAS (aka SNAP PEAS)

SUMAC

SUMMER

SUNCHOKES (see ARTICHOKES, JERUSALEM)

SUNFLOWER SEEDS (see SEEDS, SUNFLOWER)

SUNFLOWER SHOOTS (see SHOOTS, SUNFLOWER)

SUSHI, VEGETARIAN (see NORI and NORI ROLLS)

SWEET POTATOES

SWEETNESS / SWEETENERS

SYRUP, RICE (see BROWN RICE SYRUP)

SZECHUAN PEPPER (see PEPPER, SZECHUAN)

T


TAHINI

TAMARI

TAMARIND and TAMARIND PASTE

TANGERINES (see ORANGES, MANDARIN)

TAPIOCA (see also FLOUR, TAPIOCA)

TARO (aka TARO ROOT)

TARRAGON

TATSOI (aka TAT SOI)

TEFF

TEMPEH

THAI CHILI PASTE, VEGETARIAN

THAI CUISINE

THANKSGIVING

THICKENING AGENTS

THYME

TOFU—IN GENERAL

TOFU, FIRM or EXTRA-FIRM

TOFU, FROZEN

TOFU, JAPANESE

TOFU, SCRAMBLED

TOFU, SILKEN

TOFU SKIN (aka YUBA)

TOFU, SMOKED

TOFU, SOFT

TOFU, SUPER-FIRM

TOMATILLOS

TOMATOES, TOMATO JUICE, TOMATO PASTE, and TOMATO SAUCE

TOMATOES, GREEN

TOMATOES, SUN-DRIED (or OVEN-DRIED TOMATOES)

TRAIL MIX and TRAIL BARS

TRITICALE

TRUFFLES, AUSTRALIAN

TRUFFLES, BLACK

TRUFFLES, PACIFIC NORTHWEST (esp. OREGON)

TRUFFLES, WHITE

TURKISH CUISINE

TURMERIC (see also CURRY POWDER, which contains turmeric)

TURNIPS (see also GREENS, TURNIP)

U


UMAMI

UMEBOSHI, UMEBOSHI PASTE (aka PICKLED PLUM PUREE), and UMEBOSHI PLUMS (see also VINEGAR, UMEBOSHI PLUM)

V

VANILLA

VEGETABLES, ROOT (see ROOT VEGETABLES)

VEGGIE BURGERS

VERJUS

VIETNAMESE CUISINE

VINEGAR—IN GENERAL (see also specific vinegars)

VINEGAR, APPLE CIDER (aka VINEGAR, CIDER)

VINEGAR, BALSAMIC

VINEGAR, BANYULS

VINEGAR, BEER

VINEGAR, BROWN RICE (aka CHINESE BLACK VINEGAR)

VINEGAR, CHAMPAGNE

VINEGAR, CIDER (see VINEGAR, APPLE CIDER)

VINEGAR, COCONUT

VINEGAR, QUINCE

VINEGAR, RED WINE (see also VINEGAR, WINE–IN GENERAL)

VINEGAR, RICE (WINE)

VINEGAR, SHERRY

VINEGAR, UMEBOSHI PLUM (or UME PLUM)

VINEGAR, WHITE WINE

VINEGAR, WINE—IN GENERAL

VITAMIX

W


WAKAME (FRESH and DRIED)

WALNUTS

WASABI

WATER CHESTNUTS

WATERCRESS (see also LAND CRESS)

WATERMELON

WHEAT BERRIES (see also BULGUR)

WHOLE FOODS

WHOLE GRAINS (see GRAINS, WHOLE)

WILD RICE (see RICE, WILD)

WINE

WINTER

WORCESTERSHIRE SAUCE

Y


YAMS

YEAST, NUTRITIONAL (see NUTRITIONAL YEAST)

YOGURT

YUBA (see TOFU SKIN)

YUCA (aka CASSAVA)

YUCCA (see YUCA)

YUZU

Z


ZA’ATAR (the herb; see also ZA’ATAR, the spice blend)

ZA’ATAR (the spice blend; see also ZA’ATAR, the herb)

ZUCCHINI (see also SQUASH, SUMMER)

ZUCCHINI BLOSSOMS





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




CAFÉ GRATITUDE IN LOS ANGELES


“[The Flavor Bible] is a resource tool that I turn to time and time again.”

—ANGELA LIDDON, BLOGGER AND AUTHOR OF THE OH SHE GLOWS COOKBOOK




“[The Flavor Bible is] one of my three favorite non-cookbook books.”

—ROBIN ROBERTSON, AUTHOR OF MORE THAN TWENTY COOKBOOKS, INCLUDING VEGAN PLANET




“If you look on any professional chef’s bookshelf, chances are that Page and Dornenburg’s books are going to be there, battered and bruised, coffee stained and taped together at the spine. Why this place of pride? Because these books contain the most useful culinary lists ever assembled.”

—MICHAEL NATKIN, BLOGGER AND AUTHOR OF HERBIVORACIOUS



I am grateful for the warm support of the countless vegetarian and vegan writers whose appreciation of our work provided invaluable encouragement along this path.

I am grateful to all the chefs, restaurateurs, fellow authors, and other experts I interviewed, who were unfailingly generous in sharing their time and insights. Candle 79 co-owners Joy Pierson and Bart Potenza are so warm and welcoming that I felt as if I’d known them forever upon our first meeting, and Joy—a nutritionist by training—became an especially valuable sounding board.

I am grateful for the awe-inspiring work of three authors whose work has influenced me greatly. I am enormously grateful to Dr. T. Colin Campbell for making his Center for Nutrition Studies’ extraordinary certificate program in plant-based nutrition available through Cornell University; I found it nothing short of life-changing. I am grateful to Dr. Neal Barnard, whose articulate arguments helped me discover what I myself believe. And I am grateful to Dr. Joel Fuhrman for being responsible for my “seeing the light” about nutrient density, a concept that has helped me make more healthful food choices every day since.

My husband, Andrew (to whom I’m grateful for his extraordinarily beautiful photographs, and more), joins me in expressing gratitude to our family members and to new and old friends who were incredible sources of love, support, and friendship, especially Rosario Acquista, Ivan Askwith, Steve Beckta, Kristen Bell, Bill Bratton, Brian Burry, Susan Bulkeley Butler, John Carter, Ilene Cavagnuolo, Howard Childs, Maureen Cunningham, Julia D’Amico, Blake Davis, Julia Davis, Susan Davis, Laura Day, Samson Day, Susan Dey, Deborah Domanski, Jill Eikenberry, Ashley Garrett, Michael Gelb, Marketa Irglova, Alan Jones, my nutrition-obsessed bff Rikki Klieman, Brendan Milburn, Jody Oberfelder, Kelley Olson, Scott Olson, Cynthia Penney, Jeff Penney, Lynn Pike, Deborah Pines, Caroline Pires, Juergen Riehm, Stuart Rockefeller, Stephen Schiff, Tony Schwartz, Leslie Scott, Michael Tucker, Jane Umanoff, and Valerie Vigoda. Cynthia Penney provided invaluable editorial feedback, and we must also thank Shauna James Ahern, Joan Green, Tami Hardeman, Cameron Karger, Ellie Krieger, Teresa Schlanger, and Janos Wilder for their kindnesses.

I will be forever grateful to everyone on the extended Little, Brown team—with special, heartfelt thanks to my editor Michael Sand—who shared my passion for this book and for making it as good, true, and beautiful as possible, and who offered moral or other support along the way, including Reagan Arthur, Judy Clain, Nicole Dewey, Heather Fain, Peggy Freudenthal, Cathy Gruhn, Keith Hayes, Denise LaCongo, Garrett McGrath, Michael Pietsch, Kathryn Rogers, Andrea Shallcross, Rebecca Westall, and Jean Wilcox.

KAREN PAGE





PHOTOGRAPHER’S ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


I am grateful to the author of this book for giving me my big break as a photographer. I am also grateful to her for writing such an epic book and giving me the opportunity to create images to help bring it to life, providing the countless hours of encouragement and support that I needed to accomplish this mission, and being the greatest wife on the planet all along the way. With all the love in the universe, I thank you, Karen.

I am grateful to the farmers who pour their hearts and souls into creating produce all across the country—from the North Fork of Long Island to the heartland of Chicago to the California coast—produce so beautiful that it was a privilege to photograph it. My very favorite is the Union Square Greenmarket in New York City (GrowNYC.org), with which—after buying the vast majority of the produce we’ve eaten over the past two years there—I have come to feel a sacred bond. Special thanks to Bobolink Dairy and Jonathan White; Bodhitree Farm and Nevia No; Greener Pastures; Lani’s Farm; Lucky Dog Farm and Richard Giles; Keith’s Farm; Migliorelli Farm; Queens County Farm Museum and Keha McIlwaine and Karen Jarman; S & S O Produce Farms; Violet Hill Farm; Windfall Farms; and W. Rogowski Farm and Andrzej Kurosz.

I am grateful to all of the restaurants that inspired me by creating beautiful plant-based dishes, including Betony, Candle 79 and both Candle Cafes, Café Gratitude, Cookbook, Crossroads, Dirt Candy, Dovetail, Downtown, Eleven Madison Park, FnB, Glenmere Mansion, Hotel Fauchère, The Inn at Little Washington (and Rachel Hayden), Kajitsu, Mélisse, Narcissa, Per Se, Picholine, The Point, Pomegranate Café, Rouge Tomate, Suenos, Table Verte, Tulsi, and Vedge.

I am grateful to Little, Brown editor Michael Sand for his keen eye and invaluable input on the photography for this book.

Finally, I am grateful to my talented photographer friend Howard (“I will be in Japan, but call me if you have a question”) Childs for never failing to offer encouragement, time, and advice.

ANDREW DORNENBURG





ABOUT THE EXPERTS


Aaron Adams is the chef-owner of Portobello Vegan Trattoria in Portland, Oregon. portobellopdx.com

Dave Anderson is the chef-owner of Maddy’s (opened 2013), and the former chef-owner of Madeleine Bistro (2005–2013), in Los Angeles. maddysla.com

Charleen Badman is the vegetarian chef-owner of the vegetable-centric restaurant FnB in Scottsdale, Arizona. fnbrestaurant.com

Dr. Neal Barnard is the founder of the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, based in Washington, DC. pcrm.org

Christopher Bates, MS, was the executive chef and general manager of the vegetable-driven Delmonico Room at the Hotel Fauchère in Milford, Pennsylvania. hotelfauchere.com / elementwinery.com

Ami Beach is the raw chef and co-owner with her husband, chef Mark Shadle, of G-Zen in Branford, Connecticut. g-zen.com

Colin Bedford is the executive chef of the Fearrington House Restaurant in Fearrington Village, North Carolina. fearrington.com

Terrance Brennan is the chef-owner of Picholine in New York City, which has offered a vegetarian tasting menu since 2008. picholinenyc.com

Pam Brown is the chef-owner of Garden Café on the Green in Woodstock, New York. woodstockgardencafe.com

Fernanda Capobianco is the chef-owner of Vegan Divas in New York City. vegandivasnyc.com

Josiah Citrin is the chef-owner of Mélisse in Santa Monica, California, which has offered a vegetarian tasting menu since its opening. melisse.com

Amanda Cohen is the chef-owner of the restaurant Dirt Candy in New York City. dirtcandynyc.com

Jon DuBois is the chef de cuisine of Green Zebra in Chicago. greenzebrachicago.com

Chris Eddy is the executive chef of Winvian in Morris, Connecticut. winvian.com

Diane Forley is the chef and co-owner with her husband, Chef Michael Otsuka, of Flourish Baking Company in Scarsdale, New York. www.flourishbakingcompany.com

Bob Goldberg is one of four founders and co-owner (with Paul Lewin) of Follow Your Heart, one of Los Angeles’ first vegetarian restaurants and the originator of Vegenaise. followyourheart.com

Gael Greene has been one of America’s leading restaurant critics for more than four decades. insatiable-critic.com

Makini Howell is the chef-owner of Plum Bistro in Seattle. plumbistro.com

Kate Jacoby is the pastry chef and co-owner with her husband, chef Rich Landau, of Vedge in Philadelphia. vedgerestaurant.com

Deena Jalal is the co-owner (with her husband, Hin Tang) of FoMu: Alternative Ice Cream and Root: Inspired Food and Juicery in Allston, Massachusetts, just outside Boston. fomuicecream.com / rootboston.com

Mollie Katzen is the bestselling vegetarian cookbook author—and one of the bestselling cookbook authors—of all time. molliekatzen.com

Matthew Kenney is the chef-owner of M.A.K.E. in Los Angeles. matthewkenneycuisine.com

Rich Landau is the chef and co-owner with his wife, pastry chef Kate Jacoby, of Vedge in Philadelphia. vedgerestaurant.com

Ken Larsen was the executive chef of Table Verte, New York City’s first French vegetarian restaurant. He and his sous chef, Matt Roth, now operate Simply Home, a vegetarian catering company. simplyhomenyc.com

Mark Levy is the executive chef of The Point in Saranac Lake, New York. thepointsaranac.com

Pascaline Lepeltier, MS, is the sommelier of Rouge Tomate in New York City. www.rougetomatenyc.com

Deborah Madison is the founding chef of Greens Restaurant in San Francisco and one of America’s bestselling vegetarian cookbook authors. deborahmadison.com

Gaby Martinez is the general manager and mixologist of Candle 79 in New York City. candle79.com

Hemant Mathur is the chef-owner of Tulsi in New York City. tulsinyc.com

Selma Miriam is the founder and chef of Bloodroot in Bridgeport, Connecticut. bloodroot.com

Adam Mosher is the co-chef of the Lodge at Woodloch in Hawley, Pennsylvania. thelodgeatwoodloch.com

Isa Chandra Moskowitz, whose books include Isa Does It and Veganomicon, is one of America’s bestselling vegan cookbook authors and is based in Omaha. theppk.com

Andres Padilla is the chef of Rick and Deann Bayless’s restaurant Topolobampo in Chicago. fronterafiesta.com/restaurants

Joy Pierson is a nutritionist and a co-owner of Candle 79 in New York City. candle79.com

Jorge Pineda is the pastry chef and kitchen manager of Candle 79 in New York City. candle79.com

Bart Potenza is the founder and a co-owner of Candle 79 in New York City. candle79.com

Angel Ramos is the executive chef of Candle 79 in New York City. candle79.com

Tal Ronnen is the chef-owner of Crossroads in Los Angeles. crossroadskitchen.com

Suvir Saran was the executive chef of Devi in New York City and is the chef-owner of a forthcoming Indian restaurant in San Francisco. suvir.com

Chad Sarno leads the Plant-Based Professional Certification Course at Rouxbe.com and is co-author with Kris Carr of the bestseller Crazy Sexy Kitchen. chadsarno.com

Mark Shadle is the chef and co-owner, with his wife, raw chef Ami Beach, of G-Zen in Branford, Connecticut. g-zen.com

Bryce Shuman is the executive chef of Betony in New York City. betony-nyc.com

Annie Somerville is the executive chef of Greens Restaurant in San Francisco. greensrestaurant.com

Cassie Tolman (with her mother, Marlene Tolman) is the co-chef and co-owner of Pomegranate Café in Phoenix. pomegranatecafe.com

Marlene Tolman (with her daughter, Cassie Tolman) is the co-chef and co-owner of Pomegranate Café in Phoenix. pomegranatecafe.com

Eric Tucker is the executive chef of Millennium in San Francisco. millenniumrestaurant.com

Ryota Ueshima is the executive chef of Kajitsu in New York City. kajitsunyc.com

Shawain Whyte is the executive chef of Café Blossom in New York City’s Greenwich Village. blossomnyc.com / cafecarmine.php

Aaron Woo is the chef-owner of Natural Selection in Portland, Oregon. naturalselectionpdx.com





ABOUT THE AUTHOR


Karen Page is a two-time James Beard Award–winning author whose books include The Flavor Bible, which was named one of the year’s best cookbooks on both Today and Good Morning America, one of the 100 best cookbooks of the last twenty-five years by Cooking Light, and one of the ten best cookbooks in the world of the past century by Forbes. The former Washington Post wine columnist is also the author of What to Drink with What You Eat, which was named the IACP Cookbook of the Year and Georges Duboeuf Wine Book of the Year. She lives with her husband, author and photographer Andrew Dornenburg, in New York City.


KarenandAndrew.com





ABOUT THE PHOTOGRAPHER


Former restaurant chef Andrew Dornenburg grew up in San Francisco with a grandmother who had her own darkroom, and he inherited her love of photography and, later, his family’s camera equipment, which fueled his early experimentation. The culmination of a lifelong dream to unite his love of food with his passion for creating beautiful images, this is his first book as a photographer.





BOOKS BY KAREN PAGE AND ANDREW DORNENBURG


The Food Lover’s Guide to Wine

The Flavor Bible

What to Drink with What You Eat

Becoming a Chef

The New American Chef

Chef’s Night Out

Dining Out

Culinary Artistry





“The fact is that healthful eating consistently emphasizes the same foods: vegetables, fruits, beans, legumes, nuts, seeds, and whole grains.”

—DR. DAVID KATZ, IN DISEASE-PROOF: THE REMARKABLE TRUTH ABOUT WHAT MAKES US WELL (2013)

“Seven of the top ten causes of death in 2010 were chronic diseases [such as heart disease, stroke, cancer, diabetes, obesity. Health risk behaviors that cause chronic diseases include poor nutrition.]… In 2011, more than one third (36%) of adolescents said they ate fruit less than once a day, and 38% said they ate vegetables less than once a day. In addition, 38% of adults said they ate fruit less than once a day, and 23% said they ate vegetables less than once a day.”

—NATIONAL CENTER FOR CHRONIC DISEASE PREVENTION AND HEALTH PROMOTION (2014)

“It takes kids about twelve exposures to a taste to begin to like it. So it takes a while for them to get used to the idea that broccoli actually tastes good—and to admit that it does.”

—DR. MEHMET OZ, WHO HAS SAID ON OPRAH.COM THAT HE EATS VEGETARIAN AT HOME WITH HIS WIFE, LISA (A VEGETARIAN SINCE AGE 15)





NOELLE, DAUGHTER OF TOM AND JILL STEVENSON, GROWERS OF EXQUISITE BERRIES AT OYSTERPONDS FARM ON THE NORTH FORK OF LONG ISLAND





Thank you for buying this ebook, published by Hachette Digital.


To receive special offers, bonus content, and news about our latest ebooks and apps, sign up for our newsletters.


Sign Up

Or visit us at hachettebookgroup.com/newsletters





For more about this book and author, visit Bookish.com.





CONTENTS


COVER

TITLE PAGE

WELCOME

EPIGRAPH

DEDICATION

INTRODUCTION

Chapter 1 FOR THE LOVE OF PLANTS: VEGETARIANISM THROUGH THE AGES

Chapter 2 MAXIMIZING FLAVOR: CREATING A NEW, COMPASSIONATE CUISINE

Chapter 3 VEGETARIAN FLAVOR MATCHMAKING: THE LISTS A TO Z LISTINGS





ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ABOUT THE EXPERTS

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

ABOUT THE PHOTOGRAPHER

BOOKS BY KAREN PAGE AND ANDREW DORNENBURG

NEWSLETTERS

COPYRIGHT





Copyright


This book should not take the place of personalized medical care or treatment. This book contains the opinions and ideas of its author and is intended to provide useful information on its subject matter. It is sold with the understanding that the author and publisher are not engaged in rendering professional services via this book. The author and publisher disclaim all liability in connection with the use of this book.

Copyright © 2014 by Karen Page

Photographs copyright © 2014 by Andrew Dornenburg

Cover design by Keith Hayes and Wilcox Design; cover photographs by Wendell Webber

Cover copyright © 2014 by Hachette Book Group, Inc.

All rights reserved. In accordance with the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, the scanning, uploading, and electronic sharing of any part of this book without the permission of the publisher constitute unlawful piracy and theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), prior written permission must be obtained by contacting the publisher at permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.

Little, Brown and Company

Hachette Book Group

1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10104

littlebrown.com

twitter.com/littlebrown

facebook.com/littlebrownandcompany

First ebook edition: October 2014

Little, Brown and Company is a division of Hachette Book Group, Inc. The Little, Brown name and logo are trademarks of Hachette Book Group, Inc.

The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned by the publisher.

ISBN 978-0-316-24417-6

E3
